[0] The emptiness. The void. The depth of nothing etching out into that dense distance. The James Turrell installation, where light and shape and sculpture create the image of flat nothingness that I stick my hand into, able to touch the heavy absence of anything at all. So much effort to take away my sensation of line, shadow, surface. The future out in front, long vein, scraped free of detail. It is into this newness I go.

[1] I become barren. Sad sack of organs around my waist. Instead of creature-life my insides are animated by gas and tangled guts. My mother said it would feel quiet but the absence is outsung by the presence of the wound. And the creature himself? Elemental and free.

[2] I had no conception so the first few days are with a stranger, as if dropped into existence by the stork. He is shocked by the world, eyes widened by touch and sight and sound. His mouth is vast, then shrunken. He quivers, then flails. This is the moment when life takes over and finally I lose control.

[3] The context is abstract: black and grey and white, rectilinear, sharp vectorized shapes that I see sweep towards my back even though I am facing up. I know that once I hit the ground I will die, and I know it will happen soon, just moments away, and I blink and wake the moment I hit and it is so real, this feeling of imminent death, that I wake S\_\_\_ to ensure I am still alive. Something has obliterated my sense of self. I am trying to express that I am outside of my control. That I am outside of my life.

[4] I can barely sleep. I'm afraid, and I cannot move nor even feel my legs, and there is a baby nearby but I have yet to connect him to the creature that grew inside me. We travel as a unit, a caravan of my hospital bed and his traveling bassinet, S\_\_\_ and my mother by our side. I have become something else entirely, and when I do sleep my brain throws macabre parties, grotesque things that reflect horror and woundedness.

[5] Love trickles in, rivulets joining into small streams.

[6] So this is what it is to create.

[7] The words slide against each other, and finally click into place, machinery of the mind. The reader tugs at the seams. As if the box could only open one way. And I try to dip into the place of the muse, but my mind rings as if empty. Today I cover my computer screen with Post-it notes, and leave the mail scattered all over my desk, and let the dead leaves of the potted plant remain on their stalk, and shift around the bowl of trail mix and the bag of cough drops and the Tylenol and the aspirin and the stack of folded paper that marks a tiny segment of all of my contractions during labor. When the words slide against each other, they tug at the meaning in your mind. Tug is the right word because to tug is to loosen something from where it came and in the loosening shake off fragments. And it is those fragments, the detritus of meaning, that make creation magical.

[8] As far as illusions go, a child is not too bad. A steady accumulation. I have never thought so much that we are simply a bundle of nerves, responding to the world with about as much thought as a plant.

[9] After birth the words stop coming. Instead I am shocked by my body, and the day is filled with the mechanics of living: eating, sleeping, moving. I have finally become plant. I grow at an inhuman pace. I lean ever more towards the light. My other creation, the one of flesh and blood, makes funny faces. Emotions drift across his face like leaves carried past the window which turn and buck in currents of air. He frowns and then smiles, puckers then yawns, muscles slipping into meaning. If this book is to become anything, it must twist and shift as well, and when it lands in your hands it must muscle out and show you its many faces and then finally creation will be complete.

[11] My body has become slack. Is this what novelists feel, after years of success? That their words have loosened, their plot has sagged, character becoming scar. When I first write something I like, it feels taught and well-built. Something about the newness of the words, and the cleanliness with which they emerged, makes me love them. But then I start to notice the gaps, the heaviness, and, unable to correct these flaws, my writing becomes soft and comfortable, but I doubt its appeal.

[12] His fingers curl and flex, his legs bat around—even his head seems odd on his neck, at one moment low and frog-like, at another outstretched like a turtle peering far beyond its shell. Expressions sweep across his face, writing in the sand washing out toward the sea.

[14] On the other side, conception looks quiet. Over here, creation feels irrelevant. The baby asks and asks: feeding, attention, rocking, pacifiers, supervision, diaper changes, globby white spots on the insides of his cheeks, splotchy red on the bottom, gunk gluing his right eyelid shut, shushing, swaddling, burping. His head so loose on his neck I worry it will fall right off.

[16] Someone designed the house from scratch. They stood and looked at the plot of land, trying to see past whatever construction was there before, and imagined something new. They could have built anything.

[17] I still cannot connect this infant to the thing that was inside me. The baby is flesh and blood, a certainty of limbs and excrement and fluids. Pregnancy was all wonder and mystique. I had wished, desperately, to know what each bulge and kick meant, where and how he lived inside me. Now I have a small human with a penis and large testicles, toes longer than I think is right, tiny and soft fingernails that can still scratch my chest, eyes deep blue and so wide the whites can show on all sides suggesting a state of shock at the very prospect of being out in the world. This is the opposite of mystery. His body is laid out plain—my personal responsibility and, therefore, dominion. Nothing like before.

[18] I think of the child I made and how technically this makes me a mother but I don't feel like a mother. I feel like a human. I expected I would immediately love him but the first night I cried that I was no longer sure I wanted a child and S\_\_\_ held me and said it's okay it's okay nothing is ever what you expect and this is a moment of many moments. And the trauma of childbirth passed and I've come to see this little gremlin as something I am fascinated by and that fascination seeps slowly into love because we so often love what we attend to, like a poem which may be bad but recreates the place I was when I wrote it. I must love that poem because I attended to it in that moment and I think I love this child because I am attending to his errant expressions and can feel his breath against my chest.

[20] In the blank space between the two parts of this book is my labor and delivery. I don't really want to talk about it.

[22] Anne Enright writes that when her baby comes out she feels this connection—you were inside me, she thinks. I know you, she thinks. My friend says this too: these feet, I felt them from the inside. Me? Strange creature, I feel I have never met him. My empty sack of a belly is missing its wild undulations, and the infant who must learn to latch onto me for dear life is something else entirely, something needy and foreign. For me, this is discontinuity. A step function. Old, old magic trick. Transfiguration. I was transformed, and now I am not.

[24] Which is to say, I am trying to tell you that conception was not what I expected (although I expected nothing but the fuzzy haze of a future, and in this second half of the book I am adrift) but you will only see yourself in this image.

[25] C\_\_\_ asks me if I am happier post-partum than pre-. The question stumps me. Am I happier? I stumble. She says she is, that her anxiety has lifted, and the baby is sweet and easy. I say, I have to make a big life decision, I have to decide about a job offer on the other side of the world. My baby is neither here nor there. I care for him like I should, and I love him, but I don't know if I'm happy. I simply am. I struggle with my decision. Happiness with the baby feels like the wrong question. Who cares if I am happier? This probably means I am not sad. I guess I'm trying to say that caring for my child feels inevitable. That I have no choice in the matter, and so the outcome is simple and devoid of affect. Suddenly this is unlike writing. Writing is not inevitable. In fact, I've been avoiding it. Every day I wake up and again I nurse J\_\_\_. Every day I wake up and I think, Writing is waiting for me but I don't know if I will meet it. I have nothing to say. My life is simple and requires no comment. Not because parenthood is banal or empty, but because my living of it feels unrelated to writing. If this project is about the anxiety of conception, on the other side of birth I worry less about creation and more that having created has left me empty of critique. My well is glassy and still. I've lost my vision.

[26] Lately my thoughts take on the smudged quality of a poor watercolor. Sediments muddle and turn to morass. Though sameness—I am not against it, aesthetically. Blurred images, fuzzy meandering, a slight desaturation.

[27] J\_\_\_ becomes predictable. I slip into schedule.

[28] At some point I must face the computer not as transcription service, aligning fingertips with letters on the page, but as true computation machine. I have promised to reorder this book for you and in the reordering give the flocked sense of uniqueness as the paragraphs move for you. I have promised this, but like writing I am also avoiding the computation of this writing, which requires me to edge out into foggy unknown.

[30] Earlier I didn't write. I couldn't. My body wasn't my own. Moreso than pregnancy, its absence left me so weak I covered the mirror with a towel. I couldn't recognize myself, or I didn't want to, and I couldn't write. Or I didn't want to. I had to stay inside me. I had to preserve. I had to withstand the healing. I had to lie down all the time. I had to take an age to get up. I had to knit myself back together. Moreso than pregnancy, his absence was a step function. My labor was long but the junction between me and healing was vicious, crude, and fiery. Earlier I didn't write and there is no record of those instants. There is no record at all.

[31] The house across the road has a big cutout above the porch. I didn't describe that well. Don't worry about it. I'll make a plan. I'll write a poem. I'll describe the baby grunting, softly, into my chest. No, let's talk about writing. I've started to dread it. What it requires of me. The instant-now has become so large I cannot see beyond it. Life has become simple: keep everyone alive. Should I mention the protests? Should I mention the dog? What about the perpetual motion machine? "Why is it still going?" my nephew asks. "Will it go forever?" "Yes," I say, "yes, absolutely." I'll go forever. I'll ink it all down, and the trees will burgeon and bloom and then go blank again.

[32] The baby grows. Maybe I can pull him inside again, reverse it. Maybe we'll perpetually oscillate, or spiral, and he'll get small again, and my body will return to how it was, and my grandfather, whose painting of sand dunes hangs in front of me, will return, and I'll fold into my mother, and she'll fold into her mother, and we'll go back, all the way, to New Jersey, and then Austria, and then wherever the hell we came from before that, and I'll desplice back into a simpler creature, all the way back, to single cells, to ocean soup and mineral, and a world devoid of virescent light, and we'll be arid again, just the idea of life so foreign in a land of water and rocks. Or maybe I'm here, with the baby, and the computer that captures my words, and the war protests, and my life sliding through me like sand in the two or three hour spaces between feedings, and the words.

[34] A\_\_\_ and I discuss writing. To write because you have an urge to say something versus because you're drawn to the craft. Perhaps this is why I like boring novels. Perhaps this is why we find poems by looking out the window.

[35] I've become my own primordial soup. My skin is loose around my middle. I tell it, "I was really hoping we'd go back to the way things were before." My skin isn't interested in my conversation with A\_\_\_ about art and anxiety and how to afford a house. It wants to talk weight, it wants to wander my abdomen, it wants to read about new textures and old weaving technology and the way muscles lace together. I try to keep calm.

[37] I haven't been back to the ocean since. The closest is the tub, where S\_\_\_ poured water over my belly to soothe the dragon inside which wanted to escape but didn't know how. It worked, the soothing. Of course the dragon didn't know, I didn't know, the exit route was confused, the path was unmarked, the approach was—and this was a technical term—disorganized. The water: it's all the same, right? Salt levels vary. At the end, immersion in anything counts.

[38] I'll write a book about a whale avoiding humans, about a dolphin who leaves her pod to hang out with the kelp, about the tide on the Labrador Coast that dreams of going to the Antarctic, about a hurricane that wishes it were a bumblebee, about lichen that wants to grow legs, a jellyfish that wills into being its own skeleton, an octopus that becomes a hermit, a hermit crab that befriends a baby turtle, a turtle that watches a city die, a hagfish that finds a whalefall, a house eager for the sea to rise and consume it. Everything ends with conviction.

[40] The baby looks at me with devil eyes, which is to say he has no pity for me. In fact, I'm fairly sure he thinks we are still one, that I am merely an octopus leg to his octopus brain, hoping each limb will stay in sync.

[41] I try to love what my body has become, like I try to love my words even when I worry they fall short. I think the trick is to not worry—but then again, I think the trick is to worry enough to make it good. I guess the trick is to not worry too much about worrying. The baby sleeps wrapped up tight so that he doesn't shock himself. I just finished a book that made me feel sad, so sad that for an hour or two I didn't do anything, just moped about and kept the baby alive. The ending wasn't particularly sad, it was the whole book, building towards an existential sadness, and then ending without relief or even a forlorn closure, so I had to find it myself, the relief, the closure, the ending that the author didn't want to give.

[43] What I mean is, the previous paragraph will change this one. And because the previous paragraph is different each time, this one changes each time, as does the one before, and the one before that, etc. What I mean is, I'm planting the seed but it'll grow into a different green each time, the cells arranging themselves depending on the angle of the sun and the salts in the soil and the days on which the rain deigned to come down and nurture us. So I'll worry less about what this means and more about the structure in which I encode the book yet to come.

[44] It's perfect, really, because all I need to do is plant my hands in the ground and find a way to get my feet in the air and then the structure of the book simply turns me into a tree.

[47] Imagine every time you fall asleep you fall and in the falling reach out to grasp the threads of consciousness that might hold you upright. A literal reaching, a real twitching, a fear that wakes you even as you fall deeper and deeper into the well of darkness. The sky is so blue you can see it even through your eyelids which are always surprising you with their porousness, the way light just streams into you even when you cover yourself with those things you thought were meant to keep you safe and sound and in darkness. The feeling of falling backwards and trying to stop yourself. The first time I let go and trusted the rope would catch me. The way I gripped the rope as if my grip, and not the harness, would keep me safe. A paragraph that falls into the rabbit hole, ever deepening, ever darkening, ever swirling, and at the bottom you know you will meet yourself and she will say thank you for coming and she will stir the pot of witch's brew and she will say are you ready to be reborn and she will lower you into the pot and she will say this is you now and you will say this is me now and the paragraph bottoms out and suddenly, jerk, you're awake and outside again and the hole is dark and the sky is blue and you think, I'll have to do that all again.

[48] I become obsessed with whether or not my baby is objectively cute. Earlier, I was convinced he was cuter than average. My mum encouraged this attitude. And I would look at pictures of friends' infants and feel justified in my conviction. My baby's head is well-shaped and proportioned. His eyes are appropriately large, his hands perfectly small. After nursing, he makes this gesture of putting up his hands with closed fists while his eyes are tight shut; it's the quintessential look of stretching into satiation. But recently I have begun to see him perhaps as others do: just a baby, with his confused baby stare and jagged baby movements. Sometimes his mouth moves asymmetrically. Often he projects a sense of being lost, or not really there. I am obsessed with an adequate appraisal partially because I am obsessed with seeing the world clearly---without the prejudice that we bring to our lives. Everyone thinks their child is the cutest. I know this. I want to see my child plainly, without the eyes of the one who created him. This is how I want to see my writing, too. This is what it takes to make something good. I have to withdraw my penchant for my own work and see it like you might. I need to know if you would think my child is cuter than average. If I cannot discern that, I am too deeply within myself.

[49] The first anxiety of conception is, What if I cannot create? But the second is, What if I cannot properly see my creation? This is the precursor to the third question, the question that damns me, What if it is not any good? But the first two questions are necessary precursors. They set up creation for the deepest of anxieties.

[50] E\_\_\_ sends me a poem called Trophic Cascade, which documents the changes that came from introducing wolves back into a national park, and how the wolves eat the deer so the trees grow back, and then the soil heals and the flowers grow and then the butterflies come for the flowers, etc. and the turn of the poem is that the speaker has a child and that, too, creates so much from this little action. But parenthood doesn't always bring about a forest of joyous activity. The other analogy, the one in Sheila Heti's book on motherhood, is tilling the field. The constant drone of caregiving. Even now the baby is about to require me, about to interrupt this attempt at explanation, where I am just trying to make myself understood.

[53] I start to read some essays about balancing motherhood and writing but I quickly quit---they were immensely boring.

[54] I tend to think I am capable of doing anything. There are some complicated mathematical concepts I don't understand, but I believe I could understand them, if I dedicated myself and took the time to build up comprehension of the concepts that turn into the final idea. But I have, at various points, neglected mathematical study to instead do something else. L\_\_\_ is bothered that Sheila Heti must ruminate over her decision to have a child---men aren't out there spiraling into depression about such a question---and is unsure if this makes her a feminist. All that time Heti thinks about motherhood, she could have been learning math! All the time I have spent learning about math, I could have been writing.

[61] One day a whale falls from the sky, slowly, buoyed by the air creating eddies around its belly and tail and fins. The people stare. It lands softly in a field. The cows scatter. The birds find roosts in the crevices of the creature: the gnarled knobs of its skin, the loose length of its wings. The weather turns wet and soft and the body starts its long decay. Adventurers come to look for its heart, its lungs, its brain, and make potions which last a thousand years. After scavengers take the flesh, women come to conceive in the concave sanctuary of its ribs, with its promise of rebirth and protection.

[62] The basil grows up and up towards its artificial light and then, pushing past its low roof, starts to grow around it, grows atop the little light, grows up to the kitchen recessed lighting and out towards the walls. Its weight drags it down onto the rice cooker, the bowl of oranges, the carton of tomatoes, and then onto the kitchen stools, and eventually the floor, where it starts its second upward journey. Uncontained, it reaches again up onto the table, up towards the range hood above the stove and out towards the fridge and the window. Out and up it hits the walls and ceiling and, finally contained, starts to flower, sharp stalks of muted green budding into papery white blossoms which surround the entire room, birthing a cocoon for itself. In its new darkness, the room turns into deep forest, near-black, the dappled light shining through in shafts and only the fortuitous can learn to survive.

[63] I open the door labeled WATER and, as promised, past the threshold is an infinite pool, glimmering all the way out to the horizon. I turn my back and the door is gone, replaced by the water. I am standing on the lone island, a mere patch of granite. I still have the key in my hand. I know what to do. I take off my clothes, hold the key tightly in my right hand, and dive into the water. As I slowly breathe out I move faster and deeper, the water getting heavier above me, and my mind starts to cloud as I kick furiously and then more weakly, the light thinning, my eyes starting to sting. I find the next threshold, black rimmed and ornate, mere shadow at this depth, and as my consciousness starts to waver, I slip through the gate. I blink. I kick. I find the water getting light again and, as promised, airy.

[64] The teddy bear comes to life. So does the fluffed rabbit with wide, black eyes and little chicks on its toes. The curious monkey sits upright in the bookshelf, blinks once, and then twice. The small elephant, with its pink stripes thinly stretched across its body, takes a hesitant step. The large black pig, square in its box, wiggles free. The yellow fox wriggles its nose. The stiff brown goat scuffs its hooves. The dog with its stitched-on lizard head stands upright. The wolf lifts itself off the book jacket. The kangaroo jumps out of its flat and furry expanse. The archer, with his perpetually spinning arrow, takes control of his life and steps off his pedestal, free of his battery and constant motion, into the light.

[65] In the fever dream the toxins take the place of mysticism and everyone who was poisoned before you lines up to give their blessings. You sweat through your clothes but you can't feel it. Instead of dialogue you get voices which emanate from those around you but their mouths don't move. You think of Don Gately recovering from gun wounds in the David Foster Wallace novel, refusing to take the pain meds. You think, I may not survive this, and panic and the line of poisoned people shake their heads and say, "No, no, no, death is not what you should fear."

[66] I spend a week worrying about how well my baby sleeps and then peace breaks through and I realize I was on my period. The body at work again. E\_\_\_ had said at lunch that until you let go of your feelings, they control you. Or maybe he said the opposite. Something about feelings, control, the self.

[67] The baby gets agitated while nursing. He squirms and scrunches, turning his head, balling his little hands into fists. There is a world within him, already, that I cannot comprehend. I say "I'm sorry your tummy hurts," though I don't know if this is true, that his tummy hurts, that indigestion is the cause of his grief and not something I cannot even imagine.

[68] My body, stitching itself back together. My mind, renegotiating its boundaries. My belly battling with my scars and my skin battling with my hormones. My feet, so swollen immediately after, have returned to their original shape. My abdomen re-finding its tense shape. All week, mysteriously, my mother talks of an elephant rattle, until I realize she is talking about the butterfly.

[71] My mind untethers from my body. Perhaps I should have been a natural scientist, or a biochemist. I read a book about the immune system, re-appreciate the problem of protein folding, and never once connect it all back to this infant, now a baby, whose every ounce of mass has come from my body. Unlike the tree, who takes on its girth from the carbon dioxide in the air, leaving the soil heavy and laden, the infant is all milk transfigured into flesh. The beauty of the world, which at every level of detail provides mystery.

[72] Anne Enright says that the body, attuned to produce milk for the infant on demand, does not quite know what an infant is, and so lets down milk for any small, helpless, or wonderful thing.

[73] I remember the other people I could have had children with, those children that live only in my mind, and perhaps theirs, hypothetical beings whose skin and hair and eyes and fingers and eyebrows and little toes all would have been different. Mannerisms, temperament, the way their tears would have leaked from their eyes, leaving salty trails across their cheeks in the pattern specific to their body which never will be.

[77] On our backs, the tree branches remind me of fairy lights, lined with little nubs that sprout off the fan-shaped leaves. So many branches, layered up and up, criss-crossed and twittering in the air, a depth of motion, and the baby knows that this sight is worth staring at, hands plunged into the mouth with excitement and concern, eyes locked on the world because it is all so new. A world that becomes small and, through the smallness, large again.

[78] I resurface from three, four weeks of being sick. The weight of exhaustion descends into my legs, a chunky kind of langour, a shuddering of fatigue that I find so disturbing I am brought to the edge of sanity. My energy is all I have and the fear that my energy, so faded, may never return scares me shitless. Still, my energy is returning, and I have whole moments during the day when I feel capable, like this, capable enough to sit down and write it all out and continue the hard work of documenting what I've decided is called becoming.

[79] I try to become a witness to myself. I am not anxious. Instead, anxiety is here. I see it within me. I acknowledge it and its instant-now, the way it becomes and becomes.

[82] Barthes wrote of the long form (the novel) and the short form (notes). Here we live in the short form, the scraps of time between watching the baby watch the trees, between nursing, between pacing with the living being in my arms, between the naps and the sickness and the constant attention to his dumpling cheeks. I entered poetry because of its short form and the way it fit between my classes. The way the space between sentences, phrases, and words could be small and yet create such grandeur.

[86] The buoyancy between or during naps. The cycles of nursing, and refilling, nursing, and refilling.

[88] I surface, and then plunge. Underwater, my breasts become light again, and I remember what it is like to fly. It's been a long time since I've had the dream of breathing underwater, that if I just breathe deep and long enough then my lungs can separate out the oxygen and I get to feel relief as if I were breathing air. Swimming being one of those things I thought was universal, only to meet people who didn't know how to swim, who came from a landlocked area with no lakes or ponds and certainly no beaches, and I had to relearn what it is to be human.

[89] The joy of the infant is a silent, velvety texture you can run your hand over to enliven your senses, like stepping into a cool room after a muggy day out.

[91] The anxiety of conception is the long run, the road skipping out to the horizon, the sky too big, the mosquitoes too numerous, the water too deep, the energy burned in the lightbulb too intense, everything overgrown and feral and ready to live forever.

[92] The anxiety melted down into cold stagnation.

[93] The anxiety built into impossible towers.

[94] The anxiety stretched out into an infinite road, casting shadows all the way to the horizon.

[95] The mapping of it all.

[96] The summers blanketing the yard with sweat, sun, and mosquitos (coquillett, theobald, walker), rhizomatic and heavier each year, the winters lifting the warmth into the atmosphere (conduction, convection, radiation) and replacing the trees with skeletal sculptures and the slow compost of leaves and scat.

[97] I'll leave a space here for something you bring to flow into.

[98] I become heavy on my feet, then light, then heavy again.

[102] I bury my head in the ground for so long I start to hear the balance of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. I hear the worms talking to the mycelium, which call out to the roots of a nearby tree. I keep my head buried because I want to know that as I move forward in time, everything will stitch itself together instead of fall apart.

[104] So begins our separation. A first intimation that what I created will not always be bound to me. I expect you, dear reader, to take part. To tear this into pieces and rearrange it into your own life. Slot it into your empty spots. Find new gaps that only your life can fill.

[107] He learns to roll over. Feet reaching and dragging along his hips, then the struggle over the arm and shoulder, and finally the sweeping plop onto his belly, head heavy and high. Every movement must be learned from first principles. Muscles navigating gravity to produce predictable change. I imagine relearning the way words lay against each other to create motion. The sentence, stretching out its palms into the empty space around you, and then shifting its ample weight until the meaning collapses, proud and eager, into your open hands.

[109] My wrist whines, goes weak. My thumb stings at its base. My uterus cramps and then bleeds. My eyes feel tired. My sinuses hold onto congestion for weeks. My core gets torn in two. My funny bone tingles and bungs. My fingernails get too long and scratch and wail. I notice my blindspot, little grey dot in my vision. My skin burns, then peels. My mind falters.

[110] I sneak out from under a depressive load. The pendulum swinging far to one side and then, with just the smallest decrease in momentum, far to the other. A buoy topples and turns in the storm, clanging against the sides of nearby boats. I miss the ocean, sure, always, but I may be able to find buoyancy in this grove of trees.

[111] Inside the castle is a gargantuan, beating heart made of quartz and slate. Inside the heart, blood vessels of liquid metal. Gold, gallium, mercury. Inside the metal, more castles, quantum building, turning the whole thing inside out.

[112] He begins to rock, up on his knees and elbows, like a dancer about to leap or a lion cub learning to pounce. His becoming is all motion.  How to wrap him fingers around the small, knitted sheet. How to drag the mirror towards his face. How to reach the low sill of the living room window, where we've arranged the board books. He spends a long time on his back, lower lip tucked into his mouth in concentration, smacking his feet on the ground. The pride we feel when he launches himself forward---what tender pride, and I want to give it to myself, for lifting my body out of the bed, for walking into the kitchen, for writing just a few, select words.

[114] I heave and heave and heave and still the words come slowly, viscous fluid, waiting for the rare droplet to form. Even now my memory of labor is forming. The ticking of hours over into days. The sweeping decisions I had to make, not knowing how the paths might fork, then merge. The water, the vomit, the blood. The dropping heartbeat. I can feel the memories hardening over into scabs, then flaking off into a soft scar which still hurts when I run, or sit up too quickly. I've become molasses sliding down a soft hill, unstoppable.

[116] The baby looks at his hand like he's the first one to consider how it works. He moves it slowly across his vision, curling the fingers in and then stretching them out, pulling the forefinger in towards the thumb while the other fingers follow like so many ducklings. He's painting his blurbs of flesh in anatomical detail, the creases folded over like origami stars, leaving crescent marks in the skin, bookmarking the pages of his growth.

[117] Very early on he would find one hand with the other, united in the loose and ungainly grasp of someone unsure of how long a good thing will last. Then, with the effort of a young wizard just learning his craft, he would push both hands away until they split apart, releasing his will into the greater world.

[118] On his belly, he lifts his head as if coming up for air, mouth opened to the wide O of a koi fish, cheeks ruddy with the effort of experiencing the world.

[119] In the early days we were all aliens. He was a jittery frog, with wide eyes and and a loose and gaping mouth and the tremoring hands of a sea creature forced to grasp at the air. I was an oil-slicked great whale, mountain of a mother, belly quivering with its constellation of scars, piecing together the shattered bones of my past lives. The world a sharp winter blue, bruised landscape of empty branches that sat, shaken, among the black and white contrast images of our vision: stars and dots; clouds and stripes; baubled, flat grapes and symmetric, static eyes. Now we approach what I know of human lives. His eyes grok a landscape that almost makes sense and his hands move in the dance of a young apprentice unafraid to fail. I sleep in large chunks that narrow my feet down to their former shapes. The world has turned a saturated and grand blue, trees softened by their green, reeds swaying with a tufted mauve. Nothing is different, really, only it all makes just a little more sense.

[119] I surface. Breath. The air is salty. The sun refracts. The baby learns to sit up, all at once, on the surface of the earth, and immediately wants to stand. I am tired from swimming. But I like the way the earth looks from here.

[120] The anxiety of conception is that it won't work, but the real consequence of conception, I find, is that even if it works it takes its toll. I read about the normative assumption that everyone should move the same. That we should all want to walk. What if, upon losing a leg, I decide I do not want to walk. What if, upon losing my energy, I decide I do not want to move. Or what if I do. Or what if I don't. But what if I do.

[123] Little dragon, crackling with fire throughout the night. Little lamb, sleeping innocently. Little jellyfish, floating through the kitchen. Little bird, learning to move his limbs. Little dog, barking for more food. Little crab, pinching and cutting. Little fish, wet and slippy. Little goat. Little whale. Little lion.

[124] In the aftermath of conception, I wonder about permanency. How long will I live in this aftermath?

[125] His hands get bigger. I notice this more than his head, his torso, his legs. It's his hands, gripping around my finger or batting at my boob, that mark his growth. His knuckles grow prominent, the fingertips widen, the area of the palm turning large enough to mark with a stamp or sticker.

[126] I tuck into a roll, I turn into a ball. I place my hands, fingers spread, on the ground. I lift my feet over my head, I bend my arms, I take up the least possible space. I touch my elbows together, I tap forefinger to thumb, I thump my right foot on the ground and then on my left calf and then I twist into a tight knot and rinse the spine and open the hips and bend my toes back towards my shin and find my ear with my tongue and my forehead meets my knee and my hamstrings stretch and the whole world bends around me, the topology of conceiving anew.

[127] Have I become permanently tired?

[128] I am his mountain. The great formation he must summit and then descend.

[128a] He approaches an obstacle with few strategies. Arms forward, legs kicking, lots of grunting. He tries and tries, and then sits back, observing his terrain, distracted by the furniture or the dog or the stray shirt on the ground. Then, try and try, arms forward, paddling away. I want this version of conception: moving ever forward, with no distaste for failure, just the pure force of attempt, and the quiet silence of defeat, and the long, repeated puncture of success.

[129] I am becoming something new. Not quite mother. More like guardian. Maybe, sentinel. Or: apprentice. Audience. Augur. This new thing, I am becoming. Becoming and then, nothing, just the verb, transitive, eyes holding steady, and the sway of the object pouring liquid amber all around me.

[130] In this becoming, I may be untethered. I try to accept the slowing down, though I hate it, and I want to go fast again. Instead I live in my conception of myself: someone who does not feel slow in the evenings, someone who doesn't hold, now, in her mind, the steady state of another creature, a little dragon figuring how to spit fire.

[130a] I am becoming something I don't have control over.

[131] In the sullen part of the evening he falls asleep nursing, innocent in my arms. I read about women in prison, the author doing their own moral dance around what it means to commit an atrocious act when the world has given you nothing to stay tethered.

[132] I remember him as a bird, learning to flap his wings inside me, head lodged under my right rib, and now he is all mountain lion, testing out the terrain with his growing paws.

[132a] A great becoming.

[133] The end slithers away, slippery and loose. A series of becomings. A stalk of small deaths, stacked. And finally, breastfeeding becomes monumental. And finally, the words return.

[134] I feel ready to tell you that the first night after I gave birth I said, I regret having a child.

[135] A steady drip of epiphanies. I am like Lispector's sculptor, lying by the closet, aghast at the reality of the world which crashes over me again and again and again. A non-stop conception. My period returns, and I am suddenly fertile on the other side of the desert of creation, and the release allows for something vacant and new.

[136] The availability heuristic is a mental shortcut; we all do it. Because I am constantly with my own baby, I see babies everywhere, a parade of fertility, a cognitive bias so strong I wonder at its utility, at my ability to conceive of anything new.

[136a] It does not feel like I made him. Instead, I conjured him: wrote down the incantation, let incense burn the words into the atmosphere, and by some spell of the muse he formed himself.

[139] And in all of this, a seed that was within is now without. And all I did was sit down every day and write.

[140] I cracked open and out came a goblin.

[141] To be of rock or river. To let the lentils sprout, white protrusion of life in the pantry. To lose you in the patter of watercolor. Mauve, maroon, olive, lime, and marigold; topaz and also blush. Here in the pattern of words, I brought to life an idea. I conceived of it.
