My friend builds little tools for poetry. Programs to shift the words around, websites that merge words or create new ones. She says the tools are in service of her writing, but can also replace the act of writing: the process becomes the product, the new way of creating subsumes whatever is created.

The problem with the now-instant is the after. The after transfiguring into the radically new, as in dug out to its roots. I would like to plant seeds for the spring. I would like to become plant. Like The Vegetarian, I could stand upside down, spread my toes into leaves. But the snow weighs on me. I'm on the precipice of an after-now.

1907. "While throughout the lower grades of intelligence, concrete objects and acts are reproduced in thought, and the imagination is thus almost exclusively reminiscent, the further development of the power of conception implies a continually wider range of thoughts, more numerous and more varied and involved." Interstate Medical Journal November 906. Accessed via the Oxford English Dictionary.

Yesterday: blood. So.

How will you imprint into these words? If every copy is different, then you hold some keystone of the arch, and you needn't know your neighbors but they exist, each imparting an idea of what this is into the heaviness of the intertextual ether. Taken together, all copies of the book file into a larger rhythm, but no one will read all copies. Mostly you will dip into this pool, and if you're lucky see the ripples intersect from afar.

Rachel Carson, before she wrote Silent Spring, wrote about the ocean. The way life buried in its mineral mix. The way it tossed life up onto the barren land, shoving plants onto the rocks. She never bows and calls the ocean a mother, but she nods at it as the source of all life.

I am taking pictures of the leaves all the time, even though I see them every year, even though the red is just as sharp and crisp and contained as it always is, even though the way a single leaf can fade from green into yellow is repeated over and over and over, I still want to put those colors and shapes into some new form. The obsession is with capture, because it turns my sight into something else entirely, just like these words are turning the creature inside me (say it: the baby, the person) into something new.

I am breech born baby backwards, tending to this head I can feel just below my ribs. At my touch he may shift around, little bird inside me, unsure how to fly. He won't turn head down, instead kicks his bird wings into my pelvis. He has time but time shakes around, slowly sinks, will eventually go dry. Here is my first test: what I have created slides away from my controlling mind. I conceive and then the conception grows. Seed into sprout into nature's first green and suddenly the sun takes over and the weather does its chaotic work and genes unfold into a great expanding mess of creation.

I cannot quite conceive of having a child. I have shifty images in my mind of holding an infant, but they are worse than the dredges of a dream, they don't even have that strange logic behind them. They are flat. I am holding an infant. But what. What do I feel. What motion happens behind the stillness.

Occasionally I feel out of breath. I'm lying down, or sitting, and I pull in the air through my nose as hard as a I can. I need something more from the air than it wants to give.

The analogy is poor. Who has died giving birth to their novel? What about obstetric violence, or the twilight sleep? To be unconscious throughout your creation. A drug which erases my memory but creates a book. I feel compelled to write to you, but does it kick inside me? Could it kill me? Does it have to come out no matter what?

Still, the creature growing inside me swizzles and swirls and knocks around like he is the first thing to ever grow. There is a line from Portrait of a Lady on Fire where she says, Do all lovers feel like they are the first to invent love's gestures? Maybe I’m remembering the line it wrong; it doesn't matter. Every act of conception feels like the first one. Clarice Lispector wanted to describe the now-instant; I am trying to tell you about the moment when something becomes.

I try to notice when the sun aches through the clouds. It aches so hard the colors become buoyant and hopeful despite the cold. I remember my first spring in America, the way the flowers thrust and blushed into being. It was shocking, no one had planted them, they just erupted, the earth was ready. It was so different to where I grew up where it never got cold and there was no fall, nothing ever fell, and that meant nothing needed to reanimate.

I do have this strange avoidance to looking forward to things that may not happen. I don’t want to be disappointed; the best way to do this seems to never be too sure. Yet I enjoy fantasizing about the future. But it must be distant enough to never be confused with hope.

The strange shifting motions within me could be anything. Gas, organ movement, whatever it is that creates the flutter of wings in moments of fear or joy or the soft space in between (which S--- says can be manipulated, i.e. one can change anxiety into excitement simply in the mind) but there is the obvious interpretation that thing within me is beginning to move in ways apparent to me. The uncertainty about the origins of this movement seem undiscussed. When asked, Do you feel it moving yet? the answer is always sloughed off into another question about what it means to know when something you are waiting for has truly arrived.

Crease in the breast. The baby whose head sits just below the ribs. Wrong way. Token toughness. Look, this isn't it at all. Falling and shredding and keeping it all---where? In the instant-now that doesn't end. Keep time. Tick off weeks. Lay your head down with your snout facing forward. Get wet in the rain. Lose the tears; the headache is enough. Soon what is within you will be without. I mean, outside. Of you. It's terrifying to think we grow things inside us. That they will one day depart. My mum says it will feel quiet inside after. After, a hush.

It does not feel like there is anything inside me that is alive; no more alive than the rest of me, my lungs and heart and liver all living within. I am up all night vomiting and remember that

I search for one good sentence.

I visualize two paths my life might take. The one where I have a child and the one where I do not. I try to place them on equal footing, imagining each as something I truly want. Though I know both will be filled with disappointment and loss.

To push away disappointment, I prepare for the “worst”. It’s not exactly superstition. I just don’t want to be surprised by my sadness. I want to see it plain.

I want to slow down. I want to put one foot in front of the other. I want to feel my fingers at the keyboard and notice every key, the way it compresses down to its click. Sometimes when I sit down I just want to stay. The blood is moving through my veins. Come on, that has to be enough. The baby gets restless, kicks low in my pelvis and then, later, up by my belly button, above it even. Is that even possible? It's enough just to see the cream colored paint on the walls, just to hear the dog chewing on its bone, just to feel the tiny current of air over my knuckles. One foot presses lightly against the other. My head is being held up by my neck. My neck muscles must be so strong. I must be so strong to stay here and just stop and let it all be.

I wake and I wake and I wake and every time I lay in bed for an hour because I am tired but my mind it lunges out ahead of me and I try to just breath as if I could conceive of breathing as my only task but the tension coils inside me like a good spring ready to give back its energy whenever you like whenever you are ready to release it because there is so much to push on like where will I live and how will I live and is it enough and am I enough and will the after of the now-instant go like this or like that and can I slough off expectation if I just scrub my skin hard enough or do I have to conceive of everything first does everything require a pregnancy.

Maybe everything I'm looking for is staying very still. When I pause I want to stay that way. Opposite of the puppy who will spin and spin in excitement and in the patches of stillness seems only to recoil and get ready to set himself back in motion. Am I a spring also? Vibrating with what could occur.

I was so worried I would not conceive. The thought wrecked me and I cried and cried. Every spot of blood was a sign that I would bleed again forever, that I could not create, that I would not. Today I talk to a book agent, and he is kind, and I do not even have a proposal, he is used to working with academics, and I keep asking, What are you getting out of this? and he keeps smiling and saying he is looking to build relationships and help people navigate this opaque and difficult world. I know that I will write a book and I know that right now that book is not within me.

I read a book narrated by a mountain lion. He overhears hikers from L.A. discussing their love life, and traffic, and a scarcity mentality, and how all these people are moving from New York. The lion is like a child, beholding the adult world but not really understanding it. The lion says 'ellay' instead of 'L.A.' The lion says 'scare city' instead of 'scarcity'. The lion doesn't understand the human world but also doesn't feel bad about this. The lion wonders but he does not worry.

Today I am not worried. The kicks come strong even though I am busy at work and distracted. I am starting to trust that he is there. I am starting to trust.

When I first started to collage, in the depths of a depression, what I loved was the surprise. The pieces that I put together because their color or shape or texture felt right would eventually bind into a whole. There was a magic in it, that I could refrain from any hope or direction and instead focus on the feeling of putting one foot in front of the other. But as soon as it worked out a few times, I started to get nervous. Could I make a mistake?

I've started to walk everywhere. Time moves more slowly, which is what I want, a kind of dilation of life, the absence of hurry. Walking sets the city into motion, and I get sight of its limbs and joints, its angles and curves. I walk in the morning when I can look at the sky as often as I like and watch the clouds and feel the sun even though it is cold. I walk in the in the evening when I mostly stare at the dark shapes of shadows on the concrete, and look out for potholes and the gravel of construction.

I pause to look carefully at the book cover. I am obsessed with the way books feel, how they look. Their aspect ratio, the texture of the paper. If I put my nose close, I can see the dot matrix of the printed artwork. It’s not grey; it’s white with a multitude of black dots.

I have crafted light out of glass. Source out of subject. Heat comes both from the center of the earth and from outside of its bounds. I am talking about stars, about the gaseous gurgling of newness. That it comes from both sides. That what is within me also comes from without. The muse and also the inner voice. The words and their reader.

Conception being also the way we see the world. I conceive of a reader; you conceive of an author. We birth each other then, creating new creatures to hold up the edifice of communication. Athena, born of Zeus's head, was arguably his first true conception, a way of seeing that came from his imbibement of Metis and then birthed a new god. To swallow

The patterns bend and emerge like an optical illusion. I try to refuse the stress of my job and instead enjoy this thing within me, which I will only have for so long. The keys click softly but in an organic pattern, telling me something about language and how it emerges from our hands. The stress is mostly about fear, or really uncertainty, and I want to believe that I can hold uncertainty with care.

I tempt myself all day with sleep, even with the winter sun sighing in through the window. My body stuck in an old timezone. Once I was told that my poetry manuscript needed more unique words: nap, siesta, doze, snooze, shut-eye, silence, home, sea, solitude, night eventually comes, early and dark, and I make lentils and miss my dog. I curl into a routine, even as I throw my most comfortable words into the bin and search for new ones. Words that haven't been leached of meaning; words that shiver and cling.

In high school I considered giving up my first name; I wanted to take on my second name (my grandmother's) which I had learned to love. But I couldn't part with my moniker. We had fused. That which was given to me had become me. A temporary cast become exoskeleton. I, who did not create myself and did not name me, am an agglomeration of pieces that others assembled. Just as I will assemble these pieces for another.

A mood sweeps in like a fog. I no longer know where it came from. I get stuck in circles. I try to ignore the suspense; anger and hurt can do that well, but not entirely. Suspense is lodged within me, someplace deep. The fog crawls at my feet. Let me stay, it mews, and though I definitely want it to leave, it doesn’t feel entirely up to me.

I am mid-cycle, but trying to forget it. S--- and I have a long conversation while we run along the river, crossing one bridge and then another, put miles down into our shoes. The weather is cold and the trees so bare it’s embarrassing. The city feels run down, but I know that summer will enliven it. Still, it's sad to see the landscape so starkly.

I keep a hold of myself. The sadness ekes in after stress, and after that comes the fatigue, or is it just the act of creation that slows me, makes me lie in the sun with my dog and let the light bungle its ways across my eyelids.

I feel in love with my best friend. It's a strange feeling, a bit like unrequited love, a kind of heaviness to it, a finality. I want to appreciate this feeling not as anticipation but as living through the everyday weathers of my humanity. I fall in love. I want things I do not always get.

I am sorry I do not evoke Kirkegaard and some literary lineage of worry; instead I invite Gauss and his ideas about the "normal" distribution, and standard deviations, and medians. I know that "not today" does not mean never. Still I seem to become hyper sensitive to the present, when for once it might help to look ahead.

No, that's a lie. It's my fear of what's ahead that plagues me. S--- and I sit on the floor and I try diagram out my anxiety. He makes a comment about probability and I tell him he's wrong, I explain that my chances each month are the same, the prior knowledge does not, in fact, change anything. Priors---a technical term in Bayesian statistics---legitimize the hope that the past can tell us something about the future. In this case, I suggest that every unsuccessful month may, in fact, indicate a more doubtful future. I haven't seen this modeled in any scientific paper I've found, but to me the math makes sense. Every month that does not succeed means your chances of never succeeding are just a little bit higher, because a long string of bad months are a prior for never finding success. But I know that I must simply wait for the tide to come in, and go out, and just sit at the edge of the sea for as long as it takes.

For long stretches of time I accept having to wait for the winds of chance to determine my fate. I feel unrushed. But then it descends on me: the panic of uncertainty, the fear of words like “never.” I try to avoid catastrophic thinking, but how to avoid my most central tendencies? Perhaps avoidance is the wrong way to view my worries. You don't break habits, you replace them. But I fear replacing worry with hope.

There is a way in which I had hoped my life could come together before I had a child, like a cleanly wrapped present where the paper is just the right size and the folds are neat and tight. My mother warned me against this -- the time is never right, she said -- although I have seen it in others, who have done that thing where they marry and buy a house and have high-paying jobs and a room for a nursery. I have never wanted this, but I have wanted the stability of it, that false feeling of control, a way of putting bounds on my life that could make me feel safe. The alternative is a little looser, something beyond knowing, a trust or just hope that the path before me keeps going even though my ability to see far beyond my next steps becomes its own kind of box.

It is stupid how amazing the ocean is. Swimming in water so salty you float. The lifting of weight. The shifting of tide. That great mosaic of white foam as the water reaches and slips over the sand or onto rocks. I love that pattern to death, have hundreds of photos of it, could stare at it for hours, the intricacy of it, its clarity, its constant motion. Ever shifting it remains recognizable everywhere I see it. I want my writing to be like that: not one thing, but a recognizable same, something you could look at again and again and keep seeing that sameness anew.

1650. "All evidence is conception..and all conception is imagination, and proceedeth from Sense." T. Hobbes, Humane Nature xi. 136. Accessed via the Oxford English Dictionary.

The Nature Book assembles sentences about nature from other novels. Comitta’s effect here is wavelike and rhythmic, as descriptions of grass and horses and moons rustle through me. Writing like a child stacking blocks. I will assemble this book algorithmically, and let some choices fall to the computer, in the hope that by placing this responsibility outside of myself I will create something more true. As if my own hand in the matter would bind me.

It is like a huge heartbeat in my gut, a single beat that comes at random times. Like a shift of food or bowels. Like an escape artist. Like a bulge. Like a bubbling. Like a leaf of the road that lifts and shifts just a foot away. Like the saccades of the women reading next to me. Something shifts but not like the waves of the sea, which cover the sand lightly, more like the white crest that doesn't ever crash, gets subsumed back into the blue of the wave. Not like the smooth turns of a bike wheel. Not like the branches thrumming slowly in the air currents. Not like the clouds which crawl across the sky. Not like that at all.

Labor interests me because it reads like a moment where the body takes over and the mind must learn to cope. Creation becomes an involuntary act.

My dog recovers from the anaesthetic fast, but still must wear his cone of shame. He no longer recognizes himself in the mirror, shocked and angered by the dog with the strange head. His hearing is disturbed and the cone knocks on trees and doors and legs.

My dog turns and turns and turns. Yes, I abandoned a friend. I was at my limit. I am at my limit. My dog cannot get comfortable. I walk home and feel the depression lowering onto me. Good friend who I cannot abandon. I know all the tricks but I still feel weak. My dog scratches at the couch. He will burrow a hole eventually. Hole in my mind and the leaky ooze of death slides in. I know creation is joyous. Sorry, joyless. I know.

I feel I am getting huge. I ask my friend who is a bodybuilder about stretch marks. I tell him I am embarrassed, because it feels so vain to worry about leaving marks on my body, as if this could happen and there might be no trail. We talk about collagen, and diet, and microneedling. The way that scars can heal. Oxymoronic. I have stretch marks on my back from growing too fast; my brother has ones to match. The marks became their own object, their own kind of creation.

I can kind of feel my brain wisening up to its anxiety. Like, perhaps I am just feeling sad, and the object of the sadness would be something else if I didn’t have this particular anxiety in mind. I can feel the lightening. My perspective on reality shifts like a long pan in a movie: here I am from the left, but now here I see myself face on, then from the right, aspects hidden and revealed, the lighting changing my silhouette. I am no more one thing than the sea, who must change face on a dime, whose edges team with only the most robust kinds of life. I must be robust to my tides. I must remember my changing.

I planted my peppers late, and wrong somehow. They didn't grow as they did last year; the soil was too dense or too cold, the light insufficient, the seeds were old, the pots too wet or maybe too dry. By the time I realize they've stunted it is too late to grow again, the season moves swiftly, plants take time, I am no expert, instead I am messing around with these vegetables, forgetting them, losing my records, and they're small. All season they are small. The arc of the year makes for slow learning. I keep meaning to get better at this but the days drift into me before I notice their weight.

Sometimes I think there is a bird inside me, flexing and testing its wings. Settling down into a nest, perhaps, or waking up and stretching out its limbs. The jaggedness of it, the suddenness. The boniness. I read a book of short stories in which each character is pregnant with animal: sheep, horse, bird, raccoon. Jellyfish. Dragon. Sometimes the pregnancy is literal, other times it exists between reality and metaphor. What does it mean to conceive of something new? The book I think is really about longing. Or maybe it is about the strangeness of creation, the way it can push against you.

How many ways can I describe the ocean? The tuled hook of white that must grab onto the wave and create more space for itself. The too-shiny lull in its surface that reflects the addled sky. The pockmarked sand losing sight of the tide.

I want to labor this child out of me. A perverse desire to suffer just like all the people before me. I just want to know what it's like, even if I expect to not like it, or perhaps I want to prove that I am strong in some way that I doubt, or maybe I just sadistic, or maybe I want to labor everything out of me, refuse anything that could mollify the pain of creation. I am worried but not too worried because above the worry is curiosity and if only everything that caused me pain could also evoke wonder.

I suppose I should mention the ocean, that old god of creation, who birthed all the life I've ever known. This child within me swims in a kind of primordial soup, perhaps blue-green like the early algae which fed oxygen to the sky and suggested that cells might be an interesting way to create. I am excited to return to the beach, where my whale belly can be lifted by the buoyancy of the sea.

Secretly I wonder if his loss of fertility will coincide with my gain. I am days away from the middle of my cycle, but I know that I'm playing a game of chance. This cycle I am using test strips, capturing a tablespoon of urine each afternoon and watching it draw purple lines on a thin strip of paper. So far, the correct hormone surge has eluded me, but the time is not quite right yet.

Which is to say, something suggested you spend time with these words. And the space between the words and your gaze is a scary one, because once it is closed there is no going back. You've touched this sentence and now we are bound, even if that binding has been created purely such that you can sever it.

I give up. I push it out like a child. The words come out bloody but breathing. I have conceived of nothing. I worried that I would not get pregnant. My cycles came short and quick and I bled lightly and I worried in what felt like without end as if some kind of end would release me. But anxiety tends to beget more of itself, a jellyfish that stutters back into its own larval state, or a tree released from life into its own seeds, or perhaps the mitochondria that sing their own song and create themselves anew, and so worry tends to give birth to more anxiety and as my cycles ended and I finally conceived of something I got to worry about new futures, like losing that which I had just imagined, or creating something I could not love. I guess I am trying to convince you that the anxiety of conception is never ending, a stream with no estuary, just continuously winding through the dirty rocks and dance of animals around it.

I start feeling nauseated around noon. Of course, it is strangely early for sicknesses, but I also know of distributions and long tails and the strangeness of statistics. The nausea builds. At 4pm I vomit in the hallway at work. Three explosions of watery internals. I make it home and vomit more. I take up my position on the couch and stay there for 24 hours. S--- commiserates and brings me crackers and tea but there is nothing he can do. Then, in the morning, it’s gone, replaced with weariness and weakness.

Even if I stop writing the baby keeps growing. I try to mold him: sometimes I press on his head in hopes that a light touch will peel him from out of my pelvis and let him flip. This creation which I would like to flip upside down, which is really right way up, not yet ready for a smooth exit. My anxiety mounts because he will not turn, because my writing does not always come, because if I stop nothing will happen, I will stay still, my ideas will entomb themselves, and the baby will do whatever he wants and he needs no words or direction or touch at all.

I am no single thing, though the words remain static and harshly angular, resisting my change. Clarice Lispector attempts to pin down the present moment, aches against her inability to convert the now and the this and the here into black-blue ink, to turn her thoughts into scratches that can inhabit my mind. She strives against herself, against me as her reader, she strives into her failing. But reading her again I am less sure. Maybe she writes like me, simply about the inability to cast any one thing into stone. These words shift beneath me, or rather, I am unsteady on them.

I keep forgetting. People talk to me and I am fully there, all mind, no body. There is no body within me. Human drama curls around my consciousness. I am pure empath. All talk. But the leaves become so red outside. Deep and pulsing, beating against the yellow and orange, cresting against the blue of the sky. The color sings and then, the shadow lifts. I am again a mass of blood and flesh. Creator of worlds.

My body starts to rebel. My hips hurt when I sleep, I feel vaguely nauseated, I strain my groin, I hunger and then I don't, I wake up often in the night, I itch. My baby rebels too: he will not flip head down, will not let me labor him out like I had hoped. The anxiety of conception was, at first, a fear that nothing would ever come. Now it becomes the fear that what comes will not cling to my own hopes and dreams. What comes is wind and storm, tide and current. What comes on its own terms.

We get our dog neutered. He comes home whimpering in the back of the car, then struggles to lie down in the bedroom, his back leg twitching, his head drooping. With the cone he is unable to push his head into my stomach, like he normally does in the morning when he has just woken up. Instead he stands sadly still, tail down. Eventually, he curls up the best he can. We take turns laying down next to him while he sleeps in fits. We were not sure that we should neuter him, but we decided to do it. Reasons, reasons. Fertility is not his future.

We learn that our dog can still lick his wound even with the cone. He nudges the cone up his neck and holds it there with his knee. Then, with his ever-flexible neck, he can reach beyond the edge of the cone to his genitals. What is the point of this cone?

When we finally take off the cone after ten days, we learn its purpose. Cone-free, our dog runs around with play and joy and too much zest for the recommended recovery. The cone subdued him.

Lyn Hejinian dislikes the epiphanic poem. The one where the ending really hits, the poet having taken you on a ride and letting you feel the drop at the last line. The poems that lead you to a specific revelation. The theory is that this mode is closed, shutting down the possibilities of language rather than freeing the reader from guided thought. For a long time I wanted to write the perfect epiphanic poem because of its intense beauty and also the way it feels clean and right and so hard; it really felt like I had to have the epiphany with the poem, that I had to sneak up on the ideas that lurked beneath my own language, and then present my findings to you. Hejinian was the first person to suggest I needn't perfect the form, and that instead I could walk through the forest of words and stop someone entirely of my own choosing, at some perfectly and epiphanically random tree, and let you decide where to go next.

I try to avoid catastrophic thinking.

I try to live in Lispector's now-instant, whose mucused birth slips into departure too quickly. I am awake in the night. My breathing slows and then speeds. I conceive of the moment and it swims out of my grasp. I become fish and the moments slick by, I cannot stop moving. I am here and here and here. Fish become mammal become fish again. Whales and dolphins taking great gasps of air and then holding their breathe as if they could still breath water. I can no longer breath water. I am quadrant, rectangle, square, polygon. My moment becomes circle and then fractals out like pond ripples, concentric not spiral, the moments are this and this and this and this.

I have this feeling that this moment won't come back. I want to live in this state of pregnancy as best I can, in case, after I leave it, it turns out I will never return. Pregnancy is hard but demands little of me. Writing is not scarce in this way, but perhaps the scarcity would help me live in it.

I would like to spend all day waiting for him to kick. To lull when he lulls and attend when he is attentive. What would it mean to have nothing but creation? To steep myself in the way words can come from letters can come from movements of the fingers and the tendons of the hand. I would like to feel him being created inside me, just as I want to wait and watch and wait for the words, which might also come in regular intervals, which might also reveal a rhythm.

I think I may abandon a friend. Can leaving be a form of creation? Leaving is not destruction, but it does create a gap, like when the space through which I just pass becomes freshly empty of me. When I leave this part of my life, when I enter into the other side, the hole of what I just was closes in around itself, a grand hug, but perhaps the lesson is that I can never be there again, it is impossible to look back, I can never know about this new creature, everything I create I must be blind to.

When I return home I open my desk drawer and see my colored markers and collage scraps and phrases I don't remember cutting out from magazines: "rain in the," "layer upon layer," "alternating oscillations," "bows," "Hungarian-American," "the blueness of the sky," "storm, though near, is..." I almost cry at the thought of collaging and remind myself to give away my paints which I haven't used for years and many of which may have dried up. Yes, crying is easier now. It swells and spins and softens.

What will you do about gender? she asks, and it's a good question. What will I do about gender. Every time I tell someone the sex of this child they say something strange. Lucky, boys are closer to their mothers than girls are. Oh, girls are much easier to raise. I keep calling this thing I am creating 'it' because it does not yet feel human. I don't want to deny the humanity of what's within me, but I am not ready to acknowledge it as more than alive.

To conceive of such a large mass as to forget about the edges, like the octopus with its distributed brain, each limb trusting that some other mind will coordinate the actions. I want to have one hand forget the other. I want to be the limb and not the coordinator. Each poem sits like a grain of sand; the ocean decides which far flung beach to send it.

S--- drives through Arizona, almost in L.A. He sends me a picture of the desert, the flat bleached grass with a skinny band of sand slithering through its endlessness. In the distance, muted mesas, and above that the rich sapphire of sky, sparsed with white tendrils of clouds. Here in Boston the sky grows grey and trees are mostly empty, just a few dry leaves waiting to mark the end of fall.

I stare at the leaves, which skirt the tree and look up at those yet to fall. The backside of each leaf being a pale reflection. Colors are muted but still its their range, the set of hues in infinite arrangement, the palette that comes back every year. The leaves are half-fallen. The season is half-here. I am halfway through a journey which is just a beginning.

My placenta is bilobed, two pancakes separated by a small cord, two matching organs which should have been one. I am twice here. Once, watching the bird posed for flight, its head waiting for the sky to reach down. Once, pulsing blood throughout tiny tubes inside me, poised to fill some other creature with life. In the ultrasound it is clear: the even grey blobs are close but do not touch. The baby's head a mere distraction. But out here in the world the knowing is different. I know that something shifts within me. I know that my surface is thick and changing. I know that at some point separation will occur. I know that so much is happening without me.

My rib cage needs to expand. My lungs soften. I can't quite figure out where my stomach is anymore. When I bend over, everything creases. I need to stand up straighter, pull my head back. Create space. S--- builds himself a new desk, quickly, and the wood grain doesn't match, and the screws show, but he built it fast and sturdy and heavy. I've become heavy too. Bulbous. The round object below my right rib, maybe four or five inches now in diameter, could either be his head or his butt, and I wonder all day about this. All day we make something new for ourselves.

I must create myself anew. For one audience, I make my shadow round and smooth, the slow shapes of hills and moon. For another, I stretch out my fingers, bend at the elbow, and shift into the jagged surface of craters. I contort and twist. Each shape aims to appease a certain crowd, but I am blinded. The light becomes chromatic around me, long shafts of yellow that putter with dust. It is wrong to say the shadow distorts or obscures. I am what I create. I am allowed to change myself.

I am being stretched. I fling myself against the wall of my own words. I crack open. I feel like a yolk. I simmer and then, shiver. I am trying to tell you something. My hands are planted. I strengthen my shoulders, my elbows, my wrists. Finally, my palms learn to shift my weight. Inside, I've become upside down. If it comes from within me, it must be of me. There must be a theme. I keep hoping that if I attend to his movements closely enough, I will learn something about him. That I can read his palms through my belly. But I am outside his world. Blind, deaf, and dumb to it.

I hear it first. The rain comes down harder, and then harder still. I step out to the living room to see it and then, ignoring the conversation, outside onto the porch, where only a touch of water is blown into me. One step forward and I'm in the torrent. We're just past dusk and the sky retains a last hope of light. It is not just clouds above; the light peaks through; strange, right? The pummel of rain tempts me. I see myself stepping into it. I imagine my clothing wetted down to a clingy mat around me. I feel the chill of the wind against wet arms. I envision my siblings noticing and then commenting on my act. But I don't do it fast enough. The rain starts to slow, and then slow more. My moment has passed. No creation has occurred.

My back has begun to hurt, the first sign that my body is rebelling against its changing form, or rather that conception is requiring new ways of being and I have not changed enough to match the change within me. Pain being mostly perception, being a kind of conception: we create pain when we expect it and can wish it away if we do not believe it is there. Which is not to say it is not real, only that its boundaries are porous and sticky.

Language that turns to habit. I know that poetry should be "fresh" but what if I want my poetry to be well-loved and worn. What if it should feel familiar to me, a sweater I wear on my worst days. What if I want to do it wrong.

Already I project what this may become, how it may be received, as if before anything has existed it already lives a whole life as conjecture. I imagine you as enraptured or perhaps disappointed. I imagine myself as content or perhaps disturbed. It is hard to imagine a child, though, as I have no vision for this creative act, only that the process attracts me. Perhaps this is a better way to write: without goal, only an interest in the way the words might come out, ready to be surprised.

Perhaps the words are not yet ready to be birthed. The metaphor is nice: the poem comes premature, or overdue. The poem creates a difficult labor, or comes unexpectedly quick. The poem is in breech, or its chin won't tuck. My mother had seven children; she knew how to bring something into the world. What if I only write one poem in my entire life? What if I could not practice? Instead, I wash dishes for decades, watching the soap slick over my favorite mug, experimenting with sponges and scrub brushes and different temperatures of water. At the end, the poem comes out, and it is long but finite, and all I get to do is watch it grow.

I don't know much Kirkegaard, but I can give you some poetry. In Derek Walcott's "Love After Love", he implores me to love myself: "You will love again the stranger who was your self." What stranger I have become, so worried at the edge of the sea.

I am on the verge of tears. The edge of crying. I look over the precipice and it is no good out there, I'd like to stay here, where the emotions live behind the eyes, where I'm still able to walk to work and make myself dinner. I am overflowing. With what? With a lack of breath, with a fear of the future, with a desire to stay home, with a hope that the people close to me can hold me right, with a weight that bears down so hard on my ankles they swell at the elastic of my socks.

I build the poem one word at a time. They come at random intervals, edging the poem into existence. I am interested in how words commune with each other, the way they bridge across the white space, ask questions of each other. Emily Dickinson didn't want to publish some of her poems, not wanting to create a canon, unwilling to part with her uncertainty. Was it anxiety? Or some higher theory, a belief that the poetry lives in our potential to be more than one thing at once.

I seem to be obsessed with the worst outcome.

Rain mixed with sleet mixed with snow. Described as “not great weather”. Described as “the snow storm was a bust”. Described as “garbage”. Described as “lucky” because the flight wasn’t delayed. Described as “looking through the glass and watching for the trickles of water that disturb the drops and leave momentary trails of emptiness amidst the concave baubles of lights and reflection.” Described as “beautiful”.

Although the sun rises, the rain comes harder and the clouds make dawn come evenly, that staticky grey of a cyberpunk horizon. The leaves are almost gone, just the occasional tree holding on to one last section of bright red or yellow. The rain will take down most of the remaining leaves, and we'll enter the period of waiting for spring. Already the magnolia tree outside my window has its buds and I don't know if this is normal or due to the strange warmth we get periodically as winter steps in to take the place of autumn.

Some of the color moves up the trees in waves, the top a shocking red while the bottom remains a grassy green. But others come mottled, the red and green splotched together like watercolor paints, each leaf a small canvas of merging. Sometimes a leaf changes all on its own, no concern for its jungled neighbors who haven't heard the call. A single leaf, or two, or ten, responding to some touch of air I cannot see or hear or smell. The air feels lighter now, the weight of summer lifting and leaving behind this vacant feeling, and the plants know something I don't, something about how to shed their skin and prepare.

Talking about birth makes the tears reach up and out and into that cavity behind my eyes. I don't cry but the pressure is there, that heavy cloud of emotion, the weight of it, that thing that makes me speak carefully, or just keep it to myself, because words have always been a flighty vessel for tears. A coworker asked me about my emotions---This is something I worry about, she said, that it would affect my work, and I tell her with a laugh that mostly it's music that makes me want to cry, the Beatles have just become so beautifully heart-wrenching, but other than that I'm steady in the wind. I don't tell her that her question, its tender touch at the idea that the thing growing inside me is greater than myself, is changing me, will let the storm touch my my face, and that I will blink away this fog, this creep of overwhelm, that it's all so much, that everything is just so much right now.

I remember reading Anne Lamott talking about the day her book is released. You expect something to happen, she writes, but very little does. That moment when the book turns into something that anyone can read, that moment you think it becomes real, is a small wave that lulls onto the shore and then retracts, leaving the bubbling of air from the worms and the small ghost crabs. This is not what I've been told of birthing a human. Instead, the moment when a child goes from something within you to something without is, I am told, momentous. Still, I suspect that mostly we are made by the soft waves.

Funny fish within. Foot, head, butt, hand, lithe bubble of -- what? Imagine yourself a fish tank. I try to shine a light in but all I see is skin and veins. I dream of an x-ray machine so I can see his machinations. Communication only by touch. A bit like in the movie Arrival, when the aliens flitter in and out of an empty fog, this creature within me ripples my belly only when he deigns to surface. Backing away he becomes the nothing of stillness.

The ocean sweeps out and then back in. The surface breaks and cracks, fault lines of white foam netted out to the curve of the edge pushing up the sand towards me. Sometimes the surface smooths out, organ meat shiny and slick, and then it roughens, carves bulbous white bubbles. I am a very old fish and now inside creating a very new one.

In The Vegetarian a woman turns into a plant. Or rather, she believes this: in the book, she ends up in a psychiatric hospital, refusing food because all she needs is light and water. There is another version of the story, in a short story also by Han Kang, in which the woman really does turn into a plant, and her husband sets her outside on their porch, and eats the fruit that she blooms in the spring. I am starting to recognize I am not just one person. The kicks get stronger and come when people said they would: when I lay down, or after I eat. They come when I am in a work meeting, when I feel like a single person. My transformation is on the horizon, the moment before even dawn comes, the moment when the light shifts and I think, Sure, yes, maybe if I put my hands flat on the earth at some point my fingers would turn into roots.

The letters that turn shape into meaning are absurd: there is no reason this should work. The fireflies should be gone by now. This tree should not be able to grow here. It is extremely unlikely that my grandparents survived the war, this is true, but they did and never told anyone how.



***



The words slide against each other, and finally click into place, machinery of the mind. The reader tugs at the seams. As if the box could only open one way. And I try to dip into the place of the muse, but my mind rings, as if empty. Today I cover my computer screen with Post-it notes, and leave the mail scattered all over my desk, and let the dead leaves of the potted plant stay on their stalk, and shift around the bowl of trail mix and the bag of cough drops and the Tylenol and the aspirin and the stack of folded paper that marks a tiny segment of all of my contractions during labor. When the words slide against each other, they tug at the meaning in your mind. Tug is the right word because to tug is to loosen something from where it came and in the loosening shake off fragments. And it's those fragments, the detritus of meaning, that make creation magical.

I dream of the bunnies eating the neighbors garden.

In the fever dream the toxins take the place of mysticism and everyone who was poisoned before you lines up to give their blessings. You sweat through you clothes but you can't feel it. Instead of dialogue you get voices which emanate from those around you but their mouths don't move. You think of Don Gately recovering from gun wounds in the David Foster Wallace novel, refusing to take the pain meds. You think, I may not survive this, and panic and the line of poisoned people shake their heads and say, No, no, no, death is not what you should fear.

The first fear is, Will I create? The second is, Will it be good? The third is, Can I do it again? Of course the first and third are a snap -- it is the second that keeps me up at night. I tend to think I am capable of doing anything. There are some complicated mathematical concepts I don't understand, but I believe I could understand them, if I dedicated myself and took the time to build up comprehension of the concepts that build into the final idea. But I have, at various points, neglected mathematical study to instead do something closer to sociology. Yes, it is true that perhaps others could grasp the math more easily than me, but we could both get there, just at different paces. So is it true I can write a great novel, if only I dedicated the time? And what does it mean to consistently not dedicate the time. L is bothered that Sheila Heti must ruminate over her decision to have a child---men aren't out there spiraling into depression about such a question---and is unsure if this makes her a feminist. All that time Heti thinks about motherhood, she could have been learning math! All the time I have spent learning about math, I could have been writing.

I haven't been back to the ocean since. The closest is the tub, where S poured water over my belly in order to soothe the dragon inside which wanted to escape but didn't know how. It worked, the soothing. Of course the dragon didn't know, I didn't know, the exist route confused, the path unmarked, the approach, this was a technical term, disorganized. The water: it's all the same, right? Salt levels vary. At the end, immersion in anything counts.

I consider, briefly, returning to antidepressants.

Cars and trees. A plastic koala. The orchids, slowly dying in front of the painting of sand dunes. I always imagine the dunes are from Duck Beach. My memories of Duck Beach have faded. I remember the dunes. I remember the jellyfish. I remember being woken up by my cousins who I so rarely saw. I remember the first story I ever wrote, about sisters who are born two months apart. I remember my own sister explaining how that was impossible. Duck Beach--I remember the big house, and making s'mores. Do I remember a bonfire? No. I remember a bonfire from scouts camp, and the older kids making flamethrowers out of spray deodorant. The orchids are dying and I never know if this is their vision or if I have failed them. Have I failed you? I try to attend to the baby but sometimes I think he needs to sleep and my attention is misplaced. The sky is blue today, and clear, and the branches now are crusted with tiny blossoms. Am I failing here? Am I falling here? I am trying to let the language fall into itself, and then scatter, and then leave signs for the strangers walking along the sidewalk. Strangers to me. Lives of their own. The house across the road has a big cutout above the porch. I didn't describe that well. Don't worry about it. I'll make a plan. I'll write a poem. I'll describe the baby grunting, softly, into my chest. I've never written a book before. False. I've never written a book someone promised to read. I've been reading on my phone and I hate it but---no, let's talk about writing. I've started to dread it. What it requires of me. That is, I don't know what to write. Let's break down that sentence. I don't know what to write. What I mean is, in this half of the book I've lost my vision. Or I never had it. I am wading, the water is still, I'm not sure which direction to go, I don't think there is a current here. Infancy has left me static. The instant-now has become so large I cannot see beyond it. I don't know what to write, so I describe the things around me. The orchids, dying. The painting of the dunes. The lack of intention. The words without vision. At some point, creation dipped out. Said, See ya. Said, Life has become simple: keep everyone alive. Should I mention the protests? Should I mention the dog? What about the perpetual motion machine? Why is it still going? my nephew asks? Will it go forever? Yes, I say, yes, absolutely. I'll go forever. I'll write forever. I'll ink it all down, and the trees will blossom and then go green and then go blank again. The music will keep going, the guitar, the percussion, will create a current. I'll half this, and then half it again, and the spaces where words used to be will create the tension. Trust that it will work. But only if something is there, on the inside, to excavate out. Here, I'll write faster, and faster, to see if I can pull it out, the thoughts, the vision, the attempt at communication. The thing is, my body has changed, and each change tidally makes me wonder. The baby grows. Maybe I'll stay static. Maybe I can pull him inside again, reverse it. Maybe we'll perpetually oscillate, or circle, and he'll get small again, and my body will return to how it was, and my grandfather, whose painting of sand dunes hangs in front of me, will return, and I'll fold into my mother, and she'll fold into her mother, and we'll go back, all the way, to New Jersey, and then Austria, and then wherever the hell we came from before that, and I'll desplice back into a simpler creature, all the way back, to single cells, to ocean soup and mineral, and a world devoid of green, and we'll be barren again, just the idea of life so foreign in a land of water and rocks. Or maybe I'm here, with the baby, and the computer that captures my words, and the war protests, and my life sliding through me like sand in the two or three hour spaces between feedings, and the words

In the blank space between the two parts of this book is my labor and delivery. I don't really want to talk about it. In Crying in H Mart, her mother always said to keep 10% for yourself. I am keeping something for myself. I am purposefully hiding from you.

Today I see my physical therapist who gives me exercises to stitch my abdominal muscles back together and improve my core strength which was decimated due to pregnancy and means now I should not run, should not bike, should not lift anything too heavy. My body was decimated by pregnancy, though I felt good for most of it, and even now, two months out, I am starting to feel okay again; still I am limiting my movement because recovery is slow and I feel good because I am not doing too much. I wish I could have decimated myself to write a book. The thing about pregnancy is one small action leads to a cascade, but with writing I have to sit down again and again and again in order to make anything happen. An old poetry teacher sends me a poem called Trophic Cascade, which documents the changes that came from introducing wolves back into a park, and how the wolves eat the deer so the trees grow back, and then the soil gets better and the flowers grow and then the butterflies come for the flowers, etc. etc. and the turn of the poem is that the speaker has a child and that, too, creates so much from this little action. But parenthood doesn't always bring about a rainforest of joyous activity. The other analogy, the one in Sheila Heti's book on motherhood, is tilling the field. The constant drone of caregiving. Even now the baby is about to require me, about to interrupt this attempt at explanation, where I am just trying to make myself understood.

Today I decide that writing is fun. I will it.

I have a dream that I'm falling. The context is abstract: black and grey and white, rectilinear, sharp vectorized shapes that I see sweep towards my back even though I am facing up. (I must have a third person view.) I know that once I hit the ground -- whatever ground is -- I will die, and I know it will happen soon, just moments away, and I blink and wake the moment I hit and it is so real, this feeling of imminent death, that I wake S to ensure I am still alive. Something has obliterated my sense of self. I am trying to express that I am outside of my control. That I am outside of my life.

Earlier I didn't write. I couldn't. My body wasn't my own. Moreso than pregnancy, its absence left me so suddenly weak I covered the mirror with a towel. I couldn't recognize myself, or I didn't want to, and I couldn't write. Or I didn't want to. I had to stay inside me. I had to preserve. I had to withstand the healing. I had to lie down all the time. I had to take an age to get up. Slowly slowly I had to let myself knit back together. Moreso than pregnancy, his absence was a step function. My labor was long but the junction between me and healing was sharp, sudden, cutting. Earlier I didn't write and there is no record of those instants. There is no record at all.

Granules of time get pocketed, moments where the baby is absent and I return to a presumption of controlling my action, rather than acting as the external limb of this infant who dictates my actions through a lossy network, where I become the octopus arm and the baby, another tentacle sending relays back through the network of cries and grabs and jerks.

The trees spin up toward the sky and I send a letter, a hard one that I wrote months ago but now the difficulty has hardened over and I can send it without worry. Time has buried the emotional tenor of the words. I am no longer attached. Soon I will accept a job offer and close down the reality in which I don't take it. Doors, windows. At some point, this will all feel easy. Hardened. Slippery and smooth. I will have integrated the experiences, forgotten the worst parts, or transformed them, stylized them, and so the anxieties of today will become cool chunks of my past.

Across the street someone has put out in front of their house a white dresser for free. A man places his hand on the top of the dresser was he walks by, as if to say, There, there, dresser. Someone will come for you.

A is worried because there's too much to do. Too many people to stay in touch with. Too much he wants to make. My anxiety of conception is about reception: can I make something good? Are these words worth your time? Is this too self-reflective, too indulgent? A seeps into time. Developing film, color correcting photos. He is worried about relation.

The joy of the infant is silent, a velvety texture you can run your hand over and enliven your senses, like stepping into a cool room after a muggy day out, the way you remember what it is to be at peace.

Alright, let's try to do some automatic writing, let the words come out, worry not again or about their content, just let it go let it go see or seem if they go somewhere but don't want them to or expect them to or even need them to, just list out the letters of the alphabet, just repeat the word fraught over and over again fraught fraught fraught or trail mix or water bottle or peppermint tea or macbook air or the ceramic cup I got at my brother's wedding and think about the job offer I am sitting on and whether I will move and think about living with my parents and the way my mum takes the baby to meetings and the way the dogs bark at each other and the way the light comes in but not as much as I would like and the way the weather remains bad even now into April when I desperately need to be free of winter and think of the child I made and how this technically makes me a mother but how I don't feel like a mother I feel like a human and how I expected I would immediately love this child but I didn't in fact the first night I cried that I was no longer sure I wanted a child and S held me and said it's okay it's okay nothing is ever what you expect and this is a moment of many moments and that the moment of living in the trauma of childbirth passed and I've come to see this little gremlin as something I am fascinated too and that the fascination seeps slowly into love because we so often love what we attend to do like a poem which may be bad maybe who cares but to me recreates the place I was when I wrote it I must love that poem because I attended to it in that moment and I think I love this child because I am attending to his errant expressions and then feel of his breath against my chest and he is cute it is his only power right now but the cuteness and loveliness is working on me and look here, perhaps I am a mother, perhaps I can nurture a baby into a child, and I fear his death of course but fear of losing something is not the same as love and maybe this is how I should think about my job offer what am I so afraid to lose by leaving this city, this country, and to live is confusing and I also fear going and everything closes a door and I am so scared of closing doors but of course a child is a huge door closer for all the talk of keeping my career and interests it is false to say nothing changes everything changes and I should be less afraid of everything. Lately I imagine a scary image at the door of our bedroom, something from a horror movie like a child ghost or a woman with a broken neck and it's an imagine of death conjured by the fear of death because I haven't even watched the trailer for a horror movie in weeks, maybe months, so all it is is an omen or instantiation of fear and I want to put it away.

I had a child because I wanted to experience it. Which is to say, I am interested in experience, and pregnancy and childbirth and relating to an infant, etc. etc. seemed like an experience worth wading through. I have also done those float immersion tanks, where you lay neutrally buoyant in a warm, salty bath. I enjoy theatre. I tried bungee jumping and sky diving. I know that having a child is not like an art installation which plays on your eyes ability to dilate in the dark. I know this. I also know there is no good reason to have a child, just as there is no good reason for me to write a book. I am compelled.

C asks me if I am happier postpartum than pre. The question stumps me. Am I happier? I wonder. I stumble. She says she is, that her pregnancy anxiety has lifted, and the baby is sweet and easy. I say, I have to make a big life decision, I have to decide about a job offer on the other side of the world. My baby (baby J, J, I try to say his name as if he is to be a person and not only an idea) is neither here nor there: I care for him like I should, and I love him, but I don't know if I'm happy. I simply am. I struggle with my life decision. I am struggling, not to be happy, but to be decisive. Happiness with the baby feels like the wrong question. Who cares if I am happier? This probably means I am not sad. I guess I'm trying to say that caring for my child feels inevitable. That I have no choice in the matter, and so the outcome is simple and devoid of affect. Suddenly this is unlike writing. Writing is not inevitable. In fact, I've been avoiding it. Every day I wake up and again I nurse J. Every day I wake up and I think, Writing is waiting for me but I don't know if I will meet it. I have nothing to say. My life is simple and requires no comment. Not because parenthood is banal or empty, but because my living of it feels unrelated to writing. If this project is about the anxiety of conception, on the other side of birth I worry less about creation and more that having created has left me empty of critique. My well is stirred up and murky. I've lost my vision.

C says that all her pregnancy anxiety -- e.g., about the baby not kicking enough -- disappears after birth. No longer afraid, the infant becomes pleasant, easy even. Inside, all potential, there is little to detect. Outside, created, there are so many more signals. Cries, movement, breathe. Now, there is something to see and hear and touch, and these signs are available to others, and the baby becomes readable, interpretable.

The baby -- as in, the tree, the dog, the plate of food: the only baby of relevance, the only baby around.

The orchid droops. The baby grasps. The sky clouds over. The whiteness brightens the table. The mug glistens in the light. The dog sleeps, legs up and paws folded over. The painting of the sand dunes feels tumultuous today, perhaps even slightly unfinished. A door closes and I worry about decision points and the uncertainty of the future. When I look at the news I feel all this is worthless, but I am compelled to live despite my inutility.

I try to become a witness to myself. I am not anxious. Instead, anxiety is here. I see it within me. I acknowledge it and it's instant-now, the way it becomes and becomes.

J becomes predictable. I slip into schedule.

I resurface from three, four weeks of being sick. The weight of tiredness comes in my legs, a chunky feeling of pins and needles, a shuddering of fatigue that I find so disturbing I am brought to the edge of my sanity. My energy is all I have and the fear that my energy, so faded, may never return scares me shitless. Still, my energy is returning, and I have whole moments during the day when I feel capable, like this, capable enough to sit down and write it all out and continue the hard work of documenting what I've decided is called becoming.

The documenting of it all.

The buoyancy between or during naps. The cycles of nursing, and refilling, nursing, and refilling.

The baby gets agitated while nursing. He squirms and scrunches, turning his head, balling his little hands into fists. There is a world within him, already, that I cannot comprehend. I say, I'm sorry your tummy hurts, though I don't know if this is true, that his tummy hurts, that indigestion is the cause of his grief and not something I could hardly even imagine.

On our backs, the tree branches remind me of fairy lights, lined with little nubs that sprout off the fan-shaped leaves. So many branches, layered up and up, criss-crossed and twittering in the air, a depth of motion, and the baby knows that this sight is worth staring at, hands plunged into the mouth with excitement and concern, eyes locked on the world because it is all so new. A world that becomes small and through the smallness, large again.

Love trickles in, rivulets that join into small streams.

The sky looks blank white but when my eyes adjust I start to see the shape of individual clouds which layer and butt into each other with various shades of almost white, bringing in touches of grey, of blue, of that pink that may be an optical illusion from my eye adjusting to the brightness. In fact there are two distinct layers: fluffed up burgeoning white clouds pushing into each other and patterning away the blue behind and then a staticky light grey below them distributed loosely across. Is the blue behind, which you can find in the soft gaps, another layer? Someone more erudite would name the cloud types, cumulus, cirrus, stratus, affixed with their prefixes, stratus, nimbo, alto. Or maybe even if you know what something is truly called you still want to say things like, The clouds butted into each other, layered and letting the blue sneak through.

The sky, sparse of clouds and tender blue. The trees framing the view. Green and blue, our marbled planet.

The anxiety stretched out into an infinite road, casting shadows all the way to the horizon.

The anxiety of conception is the long run, the road skipping out to the horizon, the sky too big, the mosquitoes too numerous, the water too deep, the lifeline on my palm so very long, the energy burned in the lightbulb too intense, everything just so much and lasting forever.

The summers getting warmer, muggier, buggier, and the winters becoming mild and dry.

I open the door labeled WATER and, as promised, past the threshold is an infinite pool, glimmering all the way out to the horizon. I turn my back and the door is gone, replaced by the water. I am standing on the lone island, a mere patch of granite. I still have the key in my hand. I know what to do. I take off my clothes, hold the key tightly in my right hand, and dive down into the water. As I slowly breath out I move faster and deeper, the water getting heavier above me, and my mind starts to cloud as I kick furiously and then more weakly, the light thinning, my eyes starting to sting. I find the next threshold, black rimmed and ornate, mere shadow at this depth, and as my consciousness starts to waver, I slip through the gate. I blink. I kick. I find the water getting light again and, as promised, airy.

The basil grows up and up towards its artificial light and then, pushing past its low roof, starts to grow around it, grows atop the little light, grows up to the kitchen recessed lighting and out towards the walls. It weight drags it down onto the rice cooker, the bowl or oranges, the carton of tomatoes, and then onto the kitchen stools, and eventually the floor, where it starts its second upward journey. Uncontained it reaches again up onto the table, up towards the range hood above the stove and out towards the fridge and the window. Out and up it hits the walls and ceiling and, finally contained, starts to flower, sharp stalks of muted green budding into papery white blossoms which surround the entire room, birthing a cocoon for itself. In its new darkness, the room turns into deep forest, near-black, the dappled light shining through in shafts and only the fortuitous can learn to survive.

The birds have found the bird feeder but find the seeds unappealing. They start to visit regularly but poise on the green plastic trough for only enough time to nip and shun the seeds. My dad suggests maybe the seeds are the wrong kind; my mum says they have gone stale. I didn't realize birds were so picky.

I had no conception so the first few days are with a stranger, as if dropped into existence by the famed and mythical stork. He is shocked by the world, eyes widened by touch and sight and sound. His mouth goes wide then purses. He scrunches and then flails. This is the moment when life takes over and finally I lose control.

I start to read some essays about balancing motherhood and writing but I quickly quit -- they are immensely boring.

Barthes wrote of the long form -- the novel -- and the short form -- notes. Here we live in the short form, the scraps of time between watching the baby watch the trees, between nursing, between pacing with the living being in my arms, between the naps and the sickness and the constant attention to his sweet, chubby face. I entered poetry because of its short form and the way it fit between my engineering classes. The way the space between sentences, phrases, and words could be small and yet create such grandeur.

Here I sit, with the sleeping baby, and the two sleepy dogs, and the mobile of hand-stitched monsters with googly eyes. The trees cast their shuddering shadow onto the carpet, and through the window I see the bees, heavy with pollen, attend to the flowers which skirt between blue and lavender and even, maybe, white atop their green stems.

The house across the street is tan, with white accents and slotted wooden panels that remind me of palettes. The architecture, on the outside, is modern and clean, the windows are large with thick black framing and the walls are flat stucco against the slatted New England style of all the other houses. It feels to me like it should be in L.A., not Cambridge; the smooth modern style suggesting a subtle neediness I don't see in the old houses or even the new ones here. It is too expensive, like everything here, but it sits almost catty corner and we see it every time we sit down by the window to eat. Someone designed this house from scratch. They stood, possibly outside this house, and looked at the plot of land, trying to see past whatever construction was there before, and imagined something new. They could have built anything. They got the raze what was there before. They could dream as big as their budget. When I sit down to the blank page, I could write anything. Any sequence of words, even letters, are available.

The words flow like the climate don't use the word flow it is too easy too "pb and j" too much and by much I mean too little and don't use that phrase anymore "and by this i mean that" it is overused you're meant to find a new way of saying the same old thing and I should want to say something what am I trying to say is I am glad to have a child even though it caused me anxiety and I am glad that it feels lonely and uncertain I am glad I am not in a world where all my friends have kids because I hate the cliche in my life like in poetry I want my life to feel fresh and unexpected like no one has lived quite this way before and I am glad I am writing books and I am sorry I am not more persuasive that my ideas are weak I will lower myself before you if it helps but really I just want to share that I now know that baby's breath smells of milk and that one can be grateful for small amounts of sleep and that birth is traumatic and that trauma can be overcome and that I care about as much for the environment now as I did before: quite a bit, but unsure how to do more when life is so cluttered and confusing should I quit my job should I quit writing how do we tell a good climate story how do we persuade ourselves into actions how do we change perhaps that is where I should be going: how we do we change ourselves because changing others feels wrong though as N told me, in union work they call it 'organizing' not 'manipulating' and am I manipulating you here no poetry the good kind is never manipulative it doesn't tug on your heart strings but rather tries to knot them up so at the end of the poem you feel tight but also a little confused and also like you'll need some time to unknot your arteries so you can breath again.

Annie Enright says that the body, attuned to produce milk for the infant on demand, does not quite know what an infant is, and so lets down milk for any small, helpless, or wonderful thing.

He makes jerky shapes with legs, polygon blobs smoothed down by the swaddle. He's become rectilinear, topological.

The anxiety melted down into cold stagnation.

The anxiety built up into impossible towers.

A tells me about his anxiety while the baby sleeps strapped to my chest and I try not to drip noodles onto his soft, raw skull. I say, Not to invalidate your feelings, but your anxiety doesn't seem totally out of place. We discuss writing because you have an urge to say something versus because you're drawn to the craft. Perhaps this is why I like boring novels. Perhaps this is why we find poems by looking out the window. Mary Oliver said, We must stick to nature. Morgan Parker said, listen to the conversations on the street. They're both right. The bull is still and staring. The tea steams. A finishes my noodles and we get up when the baby starts to fuss and with the sun out so starkly the day becomes good. Easy.

One day a whale falls from the sky, slowly, buoyed by the air creating eddies around its belly and tail and fins. The people stare. It lands softly in a field. The cows scatter. The birds find roosts in the crevices of the creature: the gnarled knobs of its skin, the loose length of its wings. The weather turns wet and soft and the body starts it long decay. Adventures come to look for its heart, its lungs, its brain and make potions which last a thousand years. After scavengers take the flesh, women come to conceive in the concave sanctuary of its ribs, with its promise of rebirth and protection.

Empty of child, but still very much tethered, I read books upon books on my phone. I slip into them and through them, tiny page after tiny page, and etch lines of glow onto the backs of my eyelids. At first I find digital copies of the books I have physically, all ready to read but too difficult to manage one-handed. But then I turn to whatever comes across me, dancing between long novels and short stories and classics. I have never spent so much time on my phone, never read so much, never felt so stuck and through the immobility so free.

My brother's family goes on vacation and so his wife brings over Tiny, the only pet they've allowed in their household, a small snail that I can never find in a glass terrarium, originally gifted to their youngest. Each day I spray her walls with water, and every three days refresh a dollop of 'snail food' on a plastic tray. The terrarium smells of fish tank, reminds me of the fish I had in my teenage years. The snail never shows herself to me. The snail is so far from the infant in terms of time commitment it's laughable but still, caretaking is caretaking.

I become empty. Sad sack of organs around my waist. Instead of creaturelife my insides are animated by gas and confused guts. My mother said it’d feel quiet but the absence is outsung by the presence of the wound. And the creature himself? Lifelike and free.

The dog begins to enter the room and then, looking around, turns to leave. And then, no, she completes the circle, crosses the threshold and lays down, facing us.

At some point I must face the computer not as transcription service, aligning fingertips with letters on the page, but as true computation machine. I have promised to reorder this book for you and in the reordering give a the flocked sense of uniqueness as the paragraphs (poems?) move for you. I have promised this, but like writing I am also avoiding the computation of this writing, which requires me to edge out into foggy unknown.

The baby looks at me with devil eyes, which is to say he has no pity for me. In fact, I'm fairly sure he thinks we are still one, that I am merely octopus leg to his octopus brain, hoping each limb will know enough to stay in sync.

I spend the first weeks learning how to heal. At the start I can barely sleep. I'm afraid, and I cannot move nor even feel my legs, and there is a baby nearby but I have yet to connect him to the creature that grew inside. We travel as a unit, a caravan of my hospital bed and his traveling bassinet, S and my mother by our side. I have become something else entirely, and when I do sleep my brain throws macabre parties, grotesque things that have nothing to do with birth or babies but seem to reflect a kind of horror at my woundedness. I feel it too. A horror.

I become obsessed with whether or not my baby is objectively cute. Earlier, I was convinced he was cuter than average. My mum encouraged this attitude. And I would look at pictures of friends' infants and feel justified in my conviction. My baby's head is well-shaped and proportioned. His eyes are appropriately large, his hands perfectly small. After nursing, he makes this gesture of putting up his hands with closed fists while his eyes are tight shut; it's the quintessential look of stretching into satiation. But recently I have begun to see him perhaps as others do: just a baby, with his confused baby stare and jagged baby movements. Sometimes his mouth moves asymmetrically. Often he projects a sense of being lost, or not really there. I am obsessed with an adequate appraisal partially because I am obsessed with seeing the world clearly---without the prejudice that we bring to our lives. Everyone thinks their child is the cutest. I know this. I want to see my child plainly, without the eyes of the one who created him. This is how I want to see my writing, too. This is what it takes to make something good. I have to withdraw my penchant for my own work and see it like you might. I need to know if you would think my child is cuter than average. If I cannot discern that, I am too deeply within myself.

But why fear being deeply within myself? Why not believe my child is the cutest and also understand that of course this is the prejudice of having one's own child constantly on their mind? I guess, why not be prejudiced about this kind of this? So much of what I want to create requires objectivity. When I write a research paper, I must imagine all the potential critiques. I must see its flaws, in order to address those flaws and shepherd it through the peer review process. The first anxiety of conception is, What if I cannot create? But the second is, What if I cannot properly see my creation? This is the precursor to the third question, the question damns me, What if it is not any good? But the first two questions are necessary precursors. They are what set up creation for the deepest of anxieties.

On the other side conception looks quiet. Over here, creation feels irrelevant. The baby asks and asks: feeding, attention, rocking, pacifiers, supervision, diaper changes, globby white spots on the insides of his cheeks, splotchy red on the bottom, gunk gluing just his right eyelid shut, shushing, swaddling, burping. His head so loose on his neck I worry it could fall right off. This doesn't feel like creating. It feels like caretaking. Maintenance. Watching. I spend long minutes looking at his face. The gremlin expression of feeding. The satiated slump that comes after. The loose relaxation of sleep. The almost plasticine tensing of a good wail, arms and legs outstretched and pulsing. Over here, on this side of creation I am not active but reactive.

After birth the words stop coming. Instead I am shocked by my body, and the day is filled with the mechanics of living: eating, sleeping, moving. Even now I think I may have finally become plant, and grow at an inhuman pace, and lean ever more towards the light. My other creation, the one of flesh and blood, makes funny faces. Emotions drift across his face like leaves carried past the window which turn and buck in the random currents of air. He frowns and then smiles, purses then yawns, muscles slipping into meaning. If this book is to become anything, it must twist and shift as well, and when it lands in your hands it must muscle out and show you its many faces and then finally creation will be complete.

In The Golden Notebook, Doris Lessing presents Anna both through prose and through her notebooks, where she struggles (or struggles against) writing a second novel after her first, very successful one based on her time in a colony in Africa during World War Two. Anna retrospects incessantly about how her life got shifted into fiction (how she shifted it) and how this shift represents a kind of lie that she tries to write through in her notebooks, which themselves are shifting perspectives and fictionalized version of her own experience (and of course even the truth that we only access obliquely is itself a fiction Lessing is presenting to us). Lessing herself introduces the book with tales of all the different readings of it -- a book about feminism, or communism, or war -- and comments on how flattening such proclamations are, but also how that reflects its richness, and how we can read the same book and see ourselves and our concerns in it. (Lessing being happy to praise her own work.) Which is to say, I am trying to tell you that conception was not what I expected (although I expected nothing but the fuzzy haze of a future, and in this second half of the book I am adrift) but you will only see yourself in this image.

What I mean is, the previous paragraph will change this one. And because the previous paragraph is different each time, this one changes each time, as does the one before, and the one before that, etc. etc. What I mean is, I'm letting go of the plot here, I'm planting the seed but it'll grow into a different green each time, the cells arranging themselves depending on the angle of the sun and the minerals in the soil and the days on which the rain deigned to come down and nurture us. So I'll worry less about what this means and more about its DNA, the structure in which I encode the book to come.

I still can't connect this infant to the thing that was inside me. The baby is flesh and blood, a certainty of limbs and excrement and fluids. Pregnancy was all wonder and mystique. I had wished, desperately, to know what each bulge and kick really meant, where and how he lived inside me. Now I have a small human with a penis and large testicles, toes longer than I think is right, tiny and soft fingernails that still scratch my chest and his tender cheeks, eyes deep blue and so wide the whites can show on all sides suggesting a state of shock at the very prospect of being out in the world. This is the opposite of mystery. His body is laid out plain, my personal responsibility and, therefore, dominion. Nothing like before.

I try to love what my body has become, like I try to love my words even when I worry they fall short. I think the trick is to not worry, but then again, I think the trick is to worry enough to make it good. I guess the trick is to not worry too much about worrying. The baby sleeps wrapped up tight so that he doesn't shock himself. I just finished a book that made me feel sad, so sad that for an hour or two I didn't do anything, just moped about and kept the baby alive. The ending wasn't particularly sad, it was the whole book, building towards an existential sadness, and then ending without relief or even a mopey closure, so I had to find it myself, the relief, the closure, the ending that the author didn't want to give me.

M sends me a research paper that proposes that musicians trying to make a living out of their art are much like gamblers, and the results are similar: addiction, depression, anxiety. M says, Let's write this paper but for writers. I talk to a book agent who specializes in working with scientists. He says, You have to write the book you have to write, because it kind of sucks and it doesn't necessarily help your career. Wait until you have a book you feel you absolutely have to write.

I'll write a book about a whale avoiding humans, about a dolphin that leaves to speak to kelp, about the tide on the Labrador Coast that dreams of going to the antarctic, about a hurricane that wishes it were a bumblebee, about lichen that wants to grow legs, a jellyfish that wills into being its own skeleton, an octopus that becomes a hermit, a hermit crab that befriends a baby turtle, a turtle that watches a city die, a hagfish that finds a whalefall, a house eager for the sea to rise and consume it. Everything ends with conviction.

This doesn't feel like poetry. Why not? It's missing the quiet incision of words carefully placed unexpectedly against each other. It's missing the ringing of sharp imagery, that shocking clarity of a lens that makes the real world look more real. Instead my thoughts take on the smudged quality of a poor watercolor, where the colors bend and merge and the joinery makes everything look the same. Though sameness--I am not against it, aesthetically. Blurred images, fuzzy meandering, a slight desaturation.

My body has become slack. Is this what novelists feel, after years of success? That their words have loosened, the plot has sagged, the characters becoming scarred. When I first write something I like, it feels taught and well-built. Something about the newness of the words, and the cleanliness with which they emerged, makes me love them. But then I start to notice the gaps, the heaviness, and unable to correct these flaws my writing becomes soft and comfortable but I doubt its appeal.

I've become my own primordial soup. My skin is loose around my middle, discusses different futures. It likes this new larger life I've given it, even when I tell it, I was really hoping we'd go back to the way things were before. My skin is uninterested in my conversation with A about art and anxiety and how to afford a house. It wants to talk weight, it wants to wander my abdomen, it wants to read about new textures and old weaving technology and the way muscles knit together. I try to keep calm. A talks about his brain as if it's not him. As in, My brain doesn't do well with... As in, my skin has started to find itself. As in, my skin is no longer my own.

My mind untethers from my body. Perhaps I should have been a natural scientist, or a biochemist. I read a book about the immune system, re-appreciate the problem of protein folding, and never once connect it all back to this infant, now a baby, whose every ounce of mass has come from my body. Unlike the tree, who takes in its girth from the carbon dioxide in the air, leaving the soil heavy and laden, the infant is all milk transfigured into flesh. The beauty of the world, which at every level of detail provides mystery.

Imagine every time you fall asleep you fall and in the falling reach out to grasp the threads of consciousness that might hold you upright. A literal reaching, a real twitching, a fear that wakes you even as you fall deeper and deeper into the well of darkness. The sky is so blue you can see it even through your eyelids which are always surprising your with their porousness, the way light just pours into you even when you cover yourself with those things you thought were meant to keep you safe and sound and in darkness. The feeling of falling backwards and trying to stop yourself. The first time I let go and trusted the rope would catch me. The way I gripped the rope as if my grip, and not the harness, would keep me safe. A paragraph that falls into the rabbit hole, ever deepening, ever darkening, ever swirling, and at the bottom you know you will meet yourself and she will say thank you for coming and she will stir the pot of witch's brew and she will say are you ready to be reborn and she will lower you into the pot and she will say this is you now and you will say this is me now and the paragraph bottoms out and suddenly, jerk, you're awake and outside again and the hole is dark and the sky is blue and you think, i'll have to do that all again.

I'll write a book about free will, about creative computers, about female friendship, about cooperative living, about the futility of poetry, about the need for transformation, about our futility, or our hope, about the ambiguous morality of conviction, about what comes after potential.

The teddy bear comes to life. So does the fluffed rabbit with wide, black eyes and little chicks on its toes. The curious monkey sits upright in the bookshelf, blinks once, and then twice. The small elephant, which its pink stripes thinly stretched across its body, takes a hesitant step. The large black pig, square in its box, wiggles free. The yellow fox wriggles its nose. The stiff brown goat scuffs its hooves. The dog with its stitched on lizard head stands upright. The wolf lifts itself off the book jacket. The kangaroo jumps out of its flat and furry expanse. The archer, with his perpetually spinning arrow, takes control of his life and steps off his pedestal, free of his battery and constant motion, into the light.

He has little control over his limbs. His fingers curl and flex, his legs bat around, even his head seems odd on his neck, at one moment low and frog-like, then tall and outstretched like a turtle peering far outside its shell. Expressions sweep across his face, marks blown away like writing in the sand. When he gets a hand to his mouth he sucks down, as if unsure how it got there or how long it may stay.

It is special. But it is also hard.

They say that having a child is magic. But of course magic isn't real. Instead, it's an illusion that brings curiosity and joy, as opposed to the illusions that disturb. And as far as illusions go, a child is not too bad: a steady accumulation, and I motion towards it being locked in a body, it cannot control. I have never thought so much that we are simply a bundle of nerves, responding to the world with about as much thought as a plant.

I'll write a book about books. About letters. About cursive Gs and poorly scribed Ls. About how to dot your i's. About at what height to cross your t's. About the different inks used to get your words on the page. About the special way newspapers smudge onto fingers, or pasted onto splayed out books you haven't yet finished. About book-binding and zine-making. About photocopiers, fax machines, smartphone scanners, carbon copies, hand-drawn duplicates. About screen-printing sweeps and risograph colors. About pleats and folds, cuts and corners, and glues. About intertextuality, or intratextuality, or metatext---the text around the text, the introduction, the foreword, the copyright notice, the author's biography, the words that bind a piece of prose to the human world around it and make it real writing as opposed to a string of words.

I'll leave a space here for something you bring to flow into.

In "Motherhood", coin flips are used to interrupt the narrator's thoughts and force her to reconsider her opinions. Arguably this is also the role of psychic readings in the book, which although often factually incorrect the narrator attempts to understand in the larger context of her life, often metaphorically. This is the only way in which I've ever been able to understand tarot or astrology, not as predictive but as a coin flip that invites a new perspective. But perhaps there is another reading.

There is a magic in his eyes, the way he swings his head left and then, realizing something may be elsewhere, right. His eyelids lift way up, and he has a soft smile, mouth slightly agape, because the world is, in fact, quite wondrous with its color and texture and shape and the way its constantly changing, no matter how heavy your breath.

I become heavy on my feet, then light, then heavy again.

I surface, and then plunge. Underwater, my breasts become light again, and I remember what it's like to fly. It's been a long time since I've had the dream of breathing underwater, that if I just breath deep and long enough then my lungs can separate the oxygen from the water and I get to feel the relief as if I were breathing air. Swimming being one of those things I thought was universal, only to meet people who didn't know how to swim, who came from a landlocked area with no lakes or ponds and certainly no beaches, and I had to relearn what it was to be human.

It's perfect, really, because all I need to do is plant my hands in the ground and find a way to get my feet in the air and then the structure of the book simply turns me into a tree.

I start The Golden Notebook then turn away from it. Sometimes reading is a bit harder than I want. It can ask of me, and I don't always feel ready to give. Instead I read simpler books while I nurse, those frequent moments when I'm bound, throughout day but also in those moments at night when I should be rest and instead I litter my brain with words. I want to return to difficult books but my mind has softened. I seem to goo through the day, the hours sloughing off me. Each day I feel slightly more alive. Slightly more capable of creation. (Though of course I have already created and it is the aftermath that weights me.)

I seek space and then, finding it, think, what is it all for. I try to pull myself together, wrap myself tightly, stitch myself in the places where I'm torn.

Baby moves in an out of consciousness. As he surfaces he cries, weakly, then dips back into sleep. After birth I thought, This is not what I wanted. Nothing ever is.

So this is what it is to create.

“The reflex is designed to work at the sight, sound, or thought of your baby – which is spooky enough – but the brain doesn’t seem to know what a baby is, exactly, and so tries to make you feed anything helpless, or wonderful, or small.” Excerpt From "Babies" by Anne Enright

Anne Enright writes that when her baby comes out she feels this connection---you were inside me, she thinks. I know you, she thinks. My friend says this too: these feet, I felt them from the inside. Me? I don't feel this. Strange creature, I feel I have never met him. My empty sack of a belly is missing it's wild undulations, and the infant who must learn to latch onto me for dear life is something else entirely, something needy and foreign. For me, this is discontinuity. A step function. Old, old magic trick. Transfiguration. I was transformed, and now I am not.

I realize, all at once one day, that my dog cannot control his tail. This is why he must chase it, this is why it is such a good indicator of his internal state. I imagine a limb I cannot control. A limb like my heart beat, a limb like my stomach or breast milk. But those are not things that move externally. I imagine not being able to control my little finger, instead it gurgling up and down according to some autonomic response. A penis, perhaps, the closest analogue, though I have never had one.

I remember the other people I could have had children with, those children that live only in my mind, and perhaps theirs, hypothetical beings who skin and hair and eyes and fingers and eyebrows and little toes all would have been different. Mannerisms, temperament, the way their tears would have leaked from their eyes, leaving salty trails across their cheeks in the pattern specific to their body which never will be.

My body, stitching itself back together. My mind, renegotiating its boundaries. My belly battling with my scars and my skin battling with my hormones. My feet, so swollen immediately after, have returned to their original shape. My abdomen re-finding its tense shape. All week, mysteriously, my mother talks of an elephant rattle, until I realize she is talking about the butterfly.

I spend a week worrying about how well my baby sleeps and then peace breaks through and I realize I was on my period. The body at work again. E had said at lunch that until you let go of your feelings, they control you. Or maybe he said the opposite. Something about feelings, control, the self.

The emptiness. The void. The depth of nothing etching out into that dense distance. The James Turrell installation, where light and shape and sculpture create the image of flat nothingness that I stick my hand into, able to touch the heavy absence of anything at all. So much effort to take away my sensation of line, shadow, shape. The future out in front, long vein, scraped free of detail. It is into this newness I go.

I relax into the rhythm of the baby. I start to see his patterns. I light shines in, and the weather warms, and the tumbling of spring at the horizon finally finds its feet and the daffodils and the tulips unbury themselves and I can tell when he is tired and of course he starts to smile and that's the volta right there, my life turns, and I become uninterested in my work and unworried about how time passes every day and the words, when will they unlock and spill out like this? I imagine writing a novel and one day I find its rhythm and the story starts to smile at me and suddenly the life of it all starts to flow.

The first half of this book is about conceiving of something, the work of creating it. This half is the aftermath, or perhaps it refers to the editing, or the way something grows from an initial state, sculpting into the wood or nurturing up a seed. I am trying to find the place for this half of the book. The concept. I can't quite conceive of it, so instead I just record my state, my gooeyness, the slack of my skin and mind, the words that spurn and turn me. In this half, my dog lays calmly at my feet but he has become animal in a new way, no longer allowed unaccompanied while my scar heals and he remains excitable and uncertain. In this half, an infant gurgles and grunts and even, I swear, quacks in the night, the noises, I guess, of learning how to live.

I live in the instant-now, circumferenced by a litany of requirements which I avoid until they threaten. The instant-now surrounds me in two to three hour increments, dictated by the need to nurse. I think, I could stare at this baby for days, and then minutes later I am done. I arc into hour long segments of sleep, cry, and bounce. Sometimes he sleeps only in my arms, others he deigns to be placed in a bassinet.

